Statement on Race
=================

by The American Anthropological Association

17 May 1998

https://www.americananthro.org/ConnectWithAAA/Content.aspx?ItemNumber=2583

_The following statement was adopted by the Executive Board of the
American Anthropological Association on May 17, 1998, acting on a
draft prepared by a committee of representative American
anthropologists. It does not reflect a consensus of all members of the
AAA, as individuals vary in their approaches to the study of "race."
We believe that it represents generally the contemporary thinking and
scholarly positions of a majority of anthropologists._

In the United States both scholars and the general public have been
conditioned to viewing human races as natural and separate divisions
within the human species based on visible physical differences. With
the vast expansion of scientific knowledge in this century, however,
it has become clear that human populations are not unambiguous,
clearly demarcated, biologically distinct groups. Evidence from the
analysis of genetics (e.g., DNA) indicates that most physical
variation, about 94%, lies within so-called racial
groups. Conventional geographic "racial" groupings differ from one
another only in about 6% of their genes. This means that there is
greater variation within "racial" groups than between them. In
neighboring populations there is much overlapping of genes and their
phenotypic (physical) expressions. Throughout history whenever
different groups have come into contact, they have interbred. The
continued sharing of genetic materials has maintained all of humankind
as a single species.

Physical variations in any given trait tend to occur gradually rather
than abruptly over geographic areas. And because physical traits are
inherited independently of one another, knowing the range of one trait
does not predict the presence of others. For example, skin color
varies largely from light in the temperate areas in the north to dark
in the tropical areas in the south; its intensity is not related to
nose shape or hair texture. Dark skin may be associated with frizzy or
kinky hair or curly or wavy or straight hair, all of which are found
among different indigenous peoples in tropical regions. These facts
render any attempt to establish lines of division among biological
populations both arbitrary and subjective.

Historical research has shown that the idea of "race" has always
carried more meanings than mere physical differences; indeed, physical
variations in the human species have no meaning except the social ones
that humans put on them. Today scholars in many fields argue that
"race" as it is understood in the United States of America was a
social mechanism invented during the 18th century to refer to those
populations brought together in colonial America: the English and
other European settlers, the conquered Indian peoples, and those
peoples of Africa brought in to provide slave labor.

From its inception, this modern concept of "race" was modeled after an
ancient theorem of the Great Chain of Being, which posited natural
categories on a hierarchy established by God or nature. Thus "race"
was a mode of classification linked specifically to peoples in the
colonial situation. It subsumed a growing ideology of inequality
devised to rationalize European attitudes and treatment of the
conquered and enslaved peoples. Proponents of slavery in particular
during the 19th century used "race" to justify the retention of
slavery. The ideology magnified the differences among Europeans,
Africans, and Indians, established a rigid hierarchy of socially
exclusive categories underscored and bolstered unequal rank and status
differences, and provided the rationalization that the inequality was
natural or God-given. The different physical traits of
African-Americans and Indians became markers or symbols of their
status differences.

As they were constructing US society, leaders among European-Americans
fabricated the cultural/behavioral characteristics associated with
each "race," linking superior traits with Europeans and negative and
inferior ones to blacks and Indians. Numerous arbitrary and fictitious
beliefs about the different peoples were institutionalized and deeply
embedded in American thought.

Early in the 19th century the growing fields of science began to
reflect the public consciousness about human differences. Differences
among the "racial" categories were projected to their greatest extreme
when the argument was posed that Africans, Indians, and Europeans were
separate species, with Africans the least human and closer
taxonomically to apes.

Ultimately "race" as an ideology about human differences was
subsequently spread to other areas of the world. It became a strategy
for dividing, ranking, and controlling colonized people used by
colonial powers everywhere. But it was not limited to the colonial
situation. In the latter part of the 19th century it was employed by
Europeans to rank one another and to justify social, economic, and
political inequalities among their peoples. During World War II, the
Nazis under Adolf Hitler enjoined the expanded ideology of "race" and
"racial" differences and took them to a logical end: the extermination
of 11 million people of "inferior races" (e.g., Jews, Gypsies,
Africans, homosexuals, and so forth) and other unspeakable brutalities
of the Holocaust.

"Race" thus evolved as a worldview,Â a body of prejudgments that
distorts our ideas about human differences and group behavior. Racial
beliefs constitute myths about the diversity in the human species and
about the abilities and behavior of people homogenized into "racial"
categories. The myths fused behavior and physical features together in
the public mind, impeding our comprehension of both biological
variations and cultural behavior, implying that both are genetically
determined. Racial myths bear no relationship to the reality of human
capabilities or behavior. Scientists today find that reliance on such
folk beliefs about human differences in research has led to countless
errors.

At the end of the 20th century, we now understand that human cultural
behavior is learned, conditioned into infants beginning at birth, and
always subject to modification. No human is born with a built-in
culture or language. Our temperaments, dispositions, and
personalities, regardless of genetic propensities, are developed
within sets of meanings and values that we call "culture." Studies of
infant and early childhood learning and behavior attest to the reality
of our cultures in forming who we are.

It is a basic tenet of anthropological knowledge that all normal human
beings have the capacity to learn any cultural behavior. The American
experience with immigrants from hundreds of different language and
cultural backgrounds who have acquired some version of American
culture traits and behavior is the clearest evidence of this
fact. Moreover, people of all physical variations have learned
different cultural behaviors and continue to do so as modern
transportation moves millions of immigrants around the world.

How people have been accepted and treated within the context of a
given society or culture has a direct impact on how they perform in
that society. The "racial" worldview was invented to assign some
groups to perpetual low status, while others were permitted access to
privilege, power, and wealth. The tragedy in the United States has
been that the policies and practices stemming from this worldview
succeeded all too well in constructing unequal populations among
Europeans, Native Americans, and peoples of African descent. Given
what we know about the capacity of normal humans to achieve and
function within any culture, we conclude that present-day inequalities
between so-called "racial" groups are not consequences of their
biological inheritance but products of historical and contemporary
social, economic, educational, and political circumstances.

[Note: For further information on human biological variations, see the
statement prepared and issued by the American Association of Physical
Anthropologists, 1996 (AJPA 101:569-570).]

2300 Clarendon Blvd., Suite 1301, Arlington, VA 22201 | TEL
703.528.1902 | FAX 703.528.3546 | Copyright (C) 2020 The American
Anthropological Association is a 501(C)(3) Nonprofit registered in the
US under EIN: 53-0246691

~
