4:50 p.m. Mayor London Breed condemns ‘organized agitators’ in SF
=================================================================

says protesters at her home showed ‘blatant racism and hate’: Speaking
in the Mission District, Mayor London Breed said officials “feel the
hurt and the pain” of those protesting the death of George Floyd while
also speaking passionately against people “who are coming to our city
for the sole purpose of destroying our city.” Breed spoke specifically
about protesters who gathered outside her home Saturday evening. “What
bothers me the most is the fact that there are organized agitators
that do this for a living all over the country. They go to various
places and they try to incite a riot. And let me tell you, yesterday I
had some protesters - I didn’t get to see them, but sadly I saw the
videos. And — all white people yelling ‘Black lives matter,’
protesting in front of my house," Breed said. “But that didn’t bother
me as much as the taunting of me coming outside with firework torches
in their hands looking like what used to happen when the KKK would
show up to black peoples’ houses to burn their houses down.

“Don’t come for me. Cause I’m not the one. Don’t bring the fire. Cause
I’m not the one. Don’t get it twisted. Cause I’m not the one. Cause I
know what that is. I know what that is, disguised in activism. That’s
not activism. That is blatant racism and hate.

“You can disagree with my policies, you can not like me, you can
protest me at city hall all day every day. But don’t come for me like
that. Don’t come to my house. Because at the end of the day, what’s
more disrespectful is the fact that we have people who are not black
chanting ‘Black lives matter’ and don’t mean it - and don’t mean it.

~

https://www.sfchronicle.com/bayarea/article/George-Floyd-Protests-live-updates-Oakland-quiet-15305914.php
