Philando Castile's Uncle On Bridging The Gap Between The Public And Police
==========================================================================

by Christianna Silva

NPR Weekend Edition Saturday

May 30, 20208:00 AM ET
                  
[Listen 5:22](https://ondemand.npr.org/anon.npr-mp3/npr/wesat/2020/05/20200530_wesat_clarence_castile.mp3?orgId=1&topicId=1003&d=322&p=7&story=866059150&dl=1&siteplayer=true&size=5155371&dl=1)

https://www.npr.org/programs/weekend-edition-saturday/2020/05/30/866053525/weekend-edition-saturday-for-may-30-2020

Clarence D. Castile, uncle of Philando Castile, speaks outside the
governor's mansion July 7, 2016 in St. Paul, Minn.  Stephen
Maturen/Getty Images

For Clarence Castile, the death of George Floyd has felt all too
familiar.

In 2016, Castile's nephew, Philando Castile, was pulled over while
driving in a suburb of St. Paul, Minn. The officer asked to see his
license and registration, and he was reaching for them when the
officer shot him five times.

"It is very painful to see another black man killed at the hands of
the police for basically doing nothing worthy of dying for," Castile
said in an interview with NPR's _Weekend Edition_.

In the four years since the shooting, the Castile family has been
working to reduce the use of deadly force by police. Clarence even
joined the St. Paul Police Department as a reserve officer to help
improve relations between law enforcement and the public.

"I wanted to basically inform myself on some of the practices that
cops do, so I can bring that information back to my community and
share it with the younger people," he said.

His work has focused on reforming practices that have resulted in the
[deaths of multiple black men while in police
custody](https://www.npr.org/2020/05/28/863605594/george-floyd-is-not-the-first-black-man-to-die-in-minneapolis-police-custody),
as well as a [history of excessive
force](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/27/us/minneapolis-police.html)
within the Minnesota police.

"In a lot of instances, the police haven't done anything worthy of
being looked at and respected," Castile said. "If you want to be
looked at and respected, you have to treat people with respect and
look at them with kindness and care. African American neighborhoods,
they don't get that type of treatment. And when they do have an
encounter, like a simple being pulled over, that doesn't have to be a
life or death situation."

Castile was first placed on then-Minnesota Gov. Mark Dayton's working
group for police and community relations, where he helped make
recommendations for new laws and policies to close the divisions
between police and communities of color, including additional
training. But Castile worries that officers forget their training
during heated situations. "Most of the time, when the training goes
out the door, somebody gets hurt," Castile said. "That's what got
Philando Castile killed."

"Our communities and our cops need to have better relationships and
understand each other a little bit more -- actually a lot more,"
Castile said. "If we want to stop what's going on, we have to be able
to communicate. And the big problem here with the protests which have
turned into mini-riots and looting and things of that nature, that's
because of miscommunication."

In response to Floyd's death, [protests have
erupted](https://www.npr.org/2020/05/29/866022166/protests-spread-nationwide-on-fourth-night-after-minneapolis-death-of-george-flo)
across the country. Derek Chauvin, the officer who knelt on Floyd's
neck, was arrested and charged with third degree murder and
manslaughter on Friday, but protesters are calling for charges against
the other three officers who were fired over the incident,
too. Buildings and cars have been set ablaze and multiple people have
died as a result of the protests.

"You know what could be done?  Accountability, right now," Castile
said, adding: "It's about everybody playing a small part. We all have
a small part to play in the big picture, but if we just stand back and
do nothing, then there's going to be an empty space out there. And the
more of us that do nothing, the emptier the space will be."

_NPR's Andrew Craig and Martha Ann Overland produced and edited the
audio version of this interview._

~
