Inside the Trial of Dylann Roof
===============================

_The complicated moral calculations that followed a horrific crime._

By Jelani Cobb

The New Yorker / Letter from Charleston

30 January 2017

https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2017/02/06/inside-the-trial-of-dylann-roof

!["I realize these people are not criminal Roof said of the
dead. Theyre in
church."](https://media.newyorker.com/photos/59097dadebe912338a378b10/master/w_2560%2Cc_limit/170206_r29385.jpg)

"I realize these people are not criminal," Roof said of the
dead. "They're in church." Illustration by Brian Stauffer

Early on the morning of December 7th, a dozen officers from the
Department of Homeland Security were stationed outside the federal
courthouse at 85 Broad Street, in Charleston, South Carolina. It was
warm out, and the officers looked both relaxed and alert, talking
among themselves as they kept watch. The federal building is a bunker,
all right angles and gray concrete, completed in 1987. Across the
street stands the county courthouse, designed by James Hoban, the
architect of the White House, and diagonally opposite is the city
hall, built in 1801. The federal building would mar what the American
Planning Association calls one of the nation's "great streets," except
that it is hidden by a red brick antebellum structure that faces the
street--an architectural sleight of hand that says much about the
reasons that the Homeland Security officers were on Broad Street that
day.

The federal trial of Dylann Roof was commencing, eighteen months after
he shot and killed nine African-American congregants at the Emanuel
African Methodist Episcopal Church, during evening Bible study, a
crime he had confessed to on video in horrific detail and without
remorse. The authorities were concerned that Roof, who repeatedly
stated that he had committed the murders as a call to action for
persecuted whites, had become a cause celebre for white
nationalists. That movement had been exiled to the political fringes
after the murders, but it had regained some visibility during the
Presidential campaign.

Two days earlier, a jury had deadlocked in the trial of Michael
Slager, a North Charleston police officer charged with murder in the
death of Walter Scott, an unarmed fifty-year-old black man, whom
Slager had shot in the back as he ran from a traffic stop. When the
judge declared a mistrial, Scott's mother invoked God's will toward
justice, and the state's governor, Nikki Haley, cautioned patience
until the state could retry the officer. Now some feared that, despite
the confession and the overwhelming forensic evidence, something
similar might occur in the Roof trial.

Judge Richard Gergel was presiding. He is an avuncular silver-haired
man with a reputation for efficiency and a liberal bent; in 2014, he
issued a ruling that same-sex couples have the right to marry in South
Carolina, and he was responsible for installing a portrait of Jonathan
Jasper Wright, the state's first black Supreme Court justice, in the
Court building. The courtroom was solemn as Roof entered, wearing a
gray-and-black striped prison jumpsuit. He is now twenty-two, but,
with his blond hair in a fresh bowl cut, he appeared younger. He is
small to the point of fragility, and his frame swam in the
jumpsuit. He was charged with thirty-three felony counts; twelve of
them were hate crimes, and eighteen others, including firearm and
religious-obstruction charges, were punishable by death.

The family members of the victims, their supporters, the church's new
pastor, Eric Manning, and other clergy filled the benches on the right
side of the courtroom. Roof's mother and his paternal grandparents sat
in the second row on the left. Many people had assumed that Roof was a
representative of the disenfranchised white population whose narrative
of loss had come to play an unexpectedly central role in the
election. Roof dropped out of high school after repeating ninth grade
and then dropped out of an online alternative school before later
earning his G.E.D., but he did not grow up in poverty. His grandfather
is a prominent real-estate attorney in Columbia. His father, who
attended the trial sporadically, is a building contractor and owned
several properties around the state. At the time of the shooting, Roof
lived with his mother in a spacious home in Lexington, across the
Congaree River from Columbia.

He had chosen to drive two hours to Charleston to commit his crime, he
told the police, because the city is "historic." Mother Emanuel, as
the church is known, traces its roots to 1816. It was a center of
clandestine anti-slavery activity and, in 1822, when city officials
discovered that congregants were planning a slave revolt, they burned
the church to the ground. The current building was erected in 1891, on
Calhoun Street, named for Vice-President John C. Calhoun, the
intellectual progenitor of secession. The Calhoun monument, a column
eighty feet high, topped by a statue of the statesman, is half a block
away. The monument and the church, which came to play a central role
in the Southern civil-rights movement, stand like a statement and its
rebuttal. Roof had drawn up a list of half a dozen churches before
settling on Mother Emanuel. "I realize these people are not criminal,"
he said. "They're in church." He chose them, he explained, because
killing a black drug dealer would not have generated the same
attention.

The lead prosecutor was Jay Richardson, an Assistant U.S. Attorney,
based in Columbia. He is a small dark-haired man who speaks in a
commanding tone. Roof's mother sank down on the bench as he delivered
his opening statement, which contained details of the crime that had
previously been withheld from the press. At a certain point, she
slumped over. It seemed for a moment that she had fainted, but she was
taken to a hospital, and it was later learned that she had suffered a
heart attack. She survived, but did not return for the remainder of
the trial.

Richardson reported that Roof pulled into the church parking lot and
sat in his car for some time, "contemplating," before going inside. He
had loaded eight clips of hollow-point ammunition for his Glock .45
semiautomatic handgun, because, Richardson implied, he wanted to have
eighty-eight bullets; the number is white-nationalist code for "Heil
Hitler."

The most well known of Roof's victims was Emanuel's pastor, the
Reverend Clementa Pinckney, who also served in the South Carolina
State Senate. (He became a member of the state House of
Representatives in 1996, when he was twenty-three, the youngest
African-American ever elected to the state's legislature.) Pinckney
welcomed the newcomer, gave him a Bible, and offered him a chair next
to him in the circle where the twelve attendees of the study group
sat. Roof's motive was "retaliation for perceived offenses" against
the white race, Richardson said. "He also talked about 'the call to
arms,' the hope that his attack would agitate others, worsen race
relations, increase racial tensions that would lead to a race war."

Four months before the shooting, the Equal Justice Initiative issued a
report on the history of lynching in the United States after
Reconstruction. There were a hundred and eighty-four lynchings in
South Carolina. The last occurred in 1947, when a mob beat, stabbed,
and shot to death Willie Earle, a twenty-four-year-old black man who
had been accused of murdering a white cabdriver from Greenville. Strom
Thurmond, who was then the governor, pushed for those responsible to
be brought to trial, perhaps worried that the incident would undercut
efforts to recast the state's brutish image. Thirty-one white men were
charged; all were acquitted. Richardson, in his opening, seemed to
suggest that lynching had not ceased in South Carolina; it had just
been on a sixty-eight-year hiatus. Later in the trial, he made that
connection explicit, charging that Roof was guilty of "a modern-day
lynching."

Few people in Charleston's legal community expressed interest in
handling the defense, so the court appointed David Bruck to represent
Roof. Bruck is originally from Montreal but attended law school in
South Carolina and worked there for more than twenty years, both as a
public defender and in private practice. He now teaches law in
Virginia, at Washington and Lee University, where he also directs a
death-penalty defense clinic; he almost exclusively takes on cases
that involve the death penalty, which he views as both unjust and
racist in its application. In 1983, he wrote a groundbreaking article
for _The New Republic_, in which he argued that the imposition of
capital punishment, a practice that reinforced the value of the lives
of white victims over those of black ones, was as troubling as violent
crime itself.

----

In 2015, Bruck served on the defense for Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, during his
federal trial for the Boston Marathon bombing. He had previously
represented Susan Smith, a white South Carolina woman who, in 1994,
drowned her two young sons in a lake and blamed the act on a fictional
black carjacker. (Tsarnaev was sentenced to death; Smith was given a
life sentence.)  His thinking appears to be that if the lives of
defendants charged with heinous crimes can be spared, so could the
lives of those charged with lesser crimes. If the bar is raised high
enough, the death penalty might never be applied.

Bruck's relationship with Roof had been difficult almost from the
outset. The defense called for a competency assessment and moved to
have Roof declared mentally unfit, which he vigorously resisted. Roof
asked Judge Gergel to be allowed to represent himself, which he did,
during the jury selection, then asked to have counsel reinstated for
the guilt phase of the trial, but not for the penalty phase. That
ultimately led to a second competency hearing between the two phases.

In the opening statement for the defense, Bruck, who seems almost
congenitally soft-spoken, addressed the jury in such low tones that
some family members had to lean forward in their seats in order to
hear him. "The story that Mr. Richardson just finished telling you
really did occur," he said, referring to the prosecutor's graphic
recounting of the murders. Everyone, himself included, Bruck said,
expected that the verdict "will be guilty." The jurors may have been
wondering why there even was a trial, he said. Roof had offered to
plead guilty in exchange for a life sentence but the Justice
Department had not allowed it. Many people in Charleston thought that
Loretta Lynch, the U.S. Attorney General, should have spared the
families--and the city--the ordeal of a trial, but she ruled that the
hate-crime elements of the case warranted the harshest sentence at the
government's disposal. The federal hate-crime statute that covers
racially motivated crime, however, does not carry the death penalty,
which accounts for some of the additional charges. The trial, with its
attendant expense and emotional trauma, Bruck intimated, was purely a
function of the government's desire to pursue the death penalty.

Shortly after one o'clock, Richardson called the first witness:
Felicia Sanders, a longtime member of Emanuel. She escaped harm that
night, only to witness the death of her son, Tywanza, a
twenty-six-year-old poet, barber, and musician, who had planned to
start graduate school in the fall. Felicia Sanders is fifty-nine, with
deep-brown skin and shoulder-length brown hair, and that day she wore
a floral-patterned dress with a purple cardigan. She owned--and, until
the shooting, had operated--a local salon, where her son had grown up
amid a hive of conversation, jokes, and gossip. She speaks with a
pronounced Charleston accent, and when Richardson asked her if she was
married she looked at her husband, sitting in the front row, and
answered "Yes" so wearily that the courtroom erupted into laughter.

Then Richardson asked her about Roof's behavior in the church. "Most
of the time, he hung his head down just the way he's doing right now,"
she said. Tywanza was an avid social-media user, and he uploaded a
video of himself at the church to Snapchat. Roof can be seen in the
background, sitting in the Bible circle. "He was there for forty-five
minutes to an hour," Sanders continued. "We stood up and shut our eyes
to say a prayer." When she heard the first shots, she assumed that the
noise stemmed from a problem with a new elevator that was being
installed, but then she looked at the defendant. "I screamed, 'He has
a gun!' " she said. "By then, he had already shot Reverend Pinckney."

Roof began firing randomly. At one point, he paused to ask Polly
Sheppard, a seventy-two-year-old retired nurse, if he had shot her
yet. "My son rised up to get the attention off Miss Polly, even though
he had already got shot," Sanders told the jury. "He stood up and
said, 'Why are you doing this?' " She continued, "The defendant, over
there with his head hanging down, refusing to look at me right now,
told my son, 'I have to do this, because you're raping our women and
y'all taking over the world.' " She added, "That's when he put about
five bullets in my son." Sanders lay on the floor, shielding her
eleven-year-old granddaughter, holding the girl so tightly that she
worried that she might smother her.

She went on, "I said, 'Tywanza, please lay down.' He said, 'I gotta
get to Aunt Susie.' " Susie Jackson, who was eighty-seven, was the
family matriarch, Tywanza's great-aunt on his father's side. She had
been shot, but Tywanza managed to crawl over to her, and reached out
to touch her hair, before he died. Sanders began to sob as she
recalled her son's final moments. She'd had a difficult pregnancy with
him--the doctors warned that she might miscarry--and she had always
thought of his birth as a testament to faith. She had come to think of
his death in similar terms. Sanders told the court, "I watched my son
come into this world and I watched my son leave this world."

The family members sat quietly throughout most of the trial, but
Sanders's words left several of them weeping. The sign-language
interpreters who relayed the proceedings to Gary Washington, whose
mother, Ethel Lance, was among the dead, were crying. The courtroom
sketch artist and many of the journalists present paused to wipe away
tears. Judge Gergel called a short recess.

When the court reconvened, Bruck, during his cross-examination of
Sanders, asked if Roof had said anything as he left the church. "Yes,"
she re-plied. "He said he was going to kill himself, and I was
counting on that. He's evil. There's no place on earth for him except
the pit of Hell."

Dylann Roof, in writings found during a search of his prison cell,
imagined himself the last stalwart of the Lost Cause of the
Confederacy. He wrote that "segregation was not a bad thing. It was
mostly defensive." (When investigators asked where he got his
information, he said, "It's all there on the Internet." He had found
the Council of Conservative Citizens Web site, which descended from
the old White Citizens Councils.) The Civil War began in
Charleston. The Ordinance of Secession was signed in Institute Hall,
on Meeting Street, in December, 1860; the first shots were fired at
Fort Sumter, in the harbor, a few months later. The reaction of many
Charlestonians to the extraordinary moment, at a bond hearing the day
after Roof's arrest, when, one by one, family members stood and
forgave him, was an outgrowth of the city's relationship to that
past. Forgiveness was not just an example of how to metabolize hatred
directed at you, or just a demonstration of Christian faith, though it
was both of those things. It stood for a broader redemption, an
exoneration from history itself.

One afternoon during the trial, I visited the Confederate Museum, in
Market Hall, on Meeting Street. The hall was built in 1841, and served
as the headquarters of a market where, the museum's Web site states,
"fruits, meats, vegetables, and fish were sold--no slaves." In 1899,
the Daughters of the Confederacy opened the museum in a large room on
the second floor. Glass cases display Confederate uniforms, swords,
volumes of the military registries of the Confederate States of
America, and aged histories of the conflict. Chunks of shrapnel from
the Union's assault on the city rest on shelves. A South Carolina
secession flag dominates the center of the room.

One of the docents, a red-haired woman in her forties, introduced
herself as Jill. She wore an orange Clemson University sweater, in
honor of its football team, which had clinched the national
championship the night before. I told her that I was in town for the
Roof trial, and she said, "He's just a crazy nut," adding that the
jury shouldn't need to deliberate long before passing a death
sentence. Another docent, Barbara, who belongs to a Methodist church
near Emanuel, said that she'd been deeply moved by the victims'
families: "I was blown away by their faith. It was completely
unshakable." When I asked the two women if it was possible to
interpret Roof's motives as an extension of the Confederate cause,
they both demurred. "We can't control how crazy racists use the
symbols," Jill said. "What he's doing isn't connected to anything to
do with our heritage," Barbara added. A man visiting the museum
agreed, saying that Roof did not understand the Confederacy and had
merely retrofitted it to his terrible world view.
                            
----

During the recent battles over the appropriateness of flying the
Confederate flag from public buildings, some Southerners rallied
around the phrase "heritage, not hate." At the museum, it occurred to
me that this act of distancing was what Roof most fiercely
rejected. Charleston today is a testament to the successful paring of
hate from heritage. Herb Frazier, a black journalist who grew up in
the city and has attended Emanuel since childhood, told me that black
Charlestonians have always hated the Calhoun monument. "He looks down
with this scowl on his face," he said. Then, in 1999, Charleston's
Holocaust Memorial was erected just fifty feet from the base of
Calhoun's column. That proximity suggests either a wishful denial of
Calhoun's legacy or a level of irony not typically found among
municipal planners.

Last year, Frazier collaborated with Marjory Wentworth, South
Carolina's poet laureate, and Bernard Powers, a professor of history
at the College of Charleston, on "We Are Charleston," a book that puts
the church murders in the context of the city's racial history and
records the responses to it. A week after the shooting, following a
vote in the legislature, Governor Haley called for the removal of the
Confederate flag that had flown at the State House since 1961, an act
that was widely praised. But Wentworth pointed out that the decision
was at least partly pragmatic. "We've been boycotted ever since it
went up," she said. "You don't read much about that. There were a lot
of business leaders that wanted it down." It was a recognition not
altogether distinct from the one that Strom Thurmond may have reached
sixty-eight years earlier: that racism, at least in its most overt
forms, is bad for business.

But for Roof and the fraternity that he sought out on Web sites like
Stormfront, where he operated under the user name LilAryan, this
paring was a contradictory undertaking. What is the point, he seemed
to reason, of commemorating the Confederacy if you ignore the reason
that it existed in the first place?

The second day of the trial began with a debate between the defense
and the prosecution about the velocity with which Roof's soul might
arrive in Hell. Bruck had filed a motion for a mistrial, arguing that
the jury might construe Sanders's statement that "there's no place on
earth for him" as a plea for the death penalty. Richardson
objected. "She was not commenting on the punishment," he said, but
rather on where Roof would have gone if he killed himself. He added,
"That is also where he's going if he dies of natural causes or the
state does it."

For many people in Charleston, being asked to decide whether Roof
should be executed amounted to what older Southern blacks refer to as
being "put in a trickbag": a circumstance in which there are no good
options and one must reconcile with the bad ones. It had been noted
that the family members and the congregation were averse to having
Roof put to death, but they were not unanimous in their views. Eric
Manning, the pastor, told me that the A.M.E. church opposes the death
penalty: "We are called to be the light of the world, so life is
sacred." Carey Grady, a senior pastor at Reid Chapel A.M.E. Church, in
Columbia, had known Pinckney from childhood. The two friends kept in
touch regularly, and often texted. Grady showed me the message he sent
Pinckney when he first heard about the shooting. "I know you're
getting dozens of calls right now," it says. "You and the Emanuel
Church family are in our prayers." Pinckney, Grady said, almost to
himself, "never replied." The criminal-justice system was unfair to
African-Americans, Grady told me, then added, "I hate to say it, but,
if the system is unjust, the most just thing to happen in that system
is for Roof to get the death penalty, because otherwise you make the
statement that black lives really don't matter."

Malcolm Graham is the youngest brother of Cynthia Hurd, one of the
victims. She had worked for more than thirty years as a librarian for
the public and the university systems. Graham, a former state senator
from North Carolina, recently ran for Congress--something that his
sister had encouraged him to do. He concurred with Grady: why have the
death penalty if it wasn't used in this instance?  Sharon Risher's
mother, Ethel Lance, was a lifelong member of the church. She died
that night, too, but Risher thought it preferable that Roof live out
every day of his natural life in full knowledge of what he had
done. Rose Simmons's father, Daniel, an assistant pastor at the
church, was shot when he ran to help Clementa Pinckney; he died in the
hospital a few hours later. Simmons told me that her own views were
irrelevant, because Roof had "sentenced himself to death by his
actions."

Those moral calculations, as with everything else associated with the
case, were refracted through the lens of race. In a statewide poll,
two-thirds of African-Americans favored sentencing Roof to life in
prison, while sixty-four per cent of whites believed that the death
penalty was warranted. That result mirrored the general division
between blacks and whites on the issue of capital punishment, which is
driven, at least in part, by the fact that it has disproportionately
been used against black defendants. It had to be said that excising
Roof's presence from the world would change little about black
Charlestonians' perspective on what happened at the church that
night. Their white counterparts, meanwhile, were eager to reject
Roof's overtures to them. Joe Riley, the city's mayor at the time,
emphasized that the suspect was not from Charleston, a point that
Riley's successor, John Tecklenburg, reiterated, as did other whites
with whom I discussed the trial. If race offered a reluctant
commonality between Roof and white Charleston, geography provided at
least a literal distancing.

Then, there was the fact that, during the past forty years, eighty-one
per cent of those given the death sentence in South Carolina had been
convicted of killing white victims. A death sentence for Roof would
add a patina of fairness to a practice steeped in the racial
disparities of the criminal-justice system. A life sentence, on the
other hand, would seem to suggest that, whatever the opaque
mathematics of race, a black life is worth less than one-ninth of a
white one.

For David Bruck, Roof's case represented another chance to address the
unjust imposition of the death penalty. At certain moments in the
trial, though, his belief that he could diminish a racist practice by
saving the life of a white supremacist appeared idealistic to a
fault. During his cross-examination of Joseph Hamski, the F.B.I.'s
lead investigator in the case, Bruck asked, "What became of Denmark
Vesey?" Vesey, a slave who had bought his freedom and become a
carpenter, was the lead plotter of the 1822 revolt at the church. "He
was hung," Hamski replied. Bruck was suggesting that the death penalty
is irrevocably tainted by racism, but he had seemed to equate Vesey, a
man who was prepared to kill for the cause of black freedom, with
Roof, a man who had killed because he thought that blacks were too
free. The families murmured uneasily at the comparison.

The abstract morality of the sentencing contrasted with the concrete
particulars of the crime, which were presented on the second day of
the trial. Brittany Burke, who had served as an agent with the South
Carolina Law Enforcement Division, testified that seventy-four shell
casings had been recovered from the scene, and that fifty-four bullets
had been removed from the nine bodies. Clementa Pinckney was shot
three times; Sharonda Coleman-Singleton, a dynamic young preacher at
the church, was shot five times. DePayne Middleton-Doctor, a minister
and an admissions coordinator at a local learning center, was shot
eight times; Cynthia Hurd, six times. Tywanza Sanders was shot four
times; Ethel Lance, seven; Myra Thompson, who had received her
preaching certificate that evening and was excited about leading Bible
study for the first time, eight times. Daniel Simmons was shot four
times. Susie Jackson, the oldest of the victims, was shot eleven
times.

Judge Gergel had suggested that the family members give strong
consideration to whether they would return to the courtroom after the
morning recess. The prosecution was going to walk the jury through the
shooting, with photographs of the crime scene, and there was no shame
in wanting to avoid that spectacle. But the families returned,
escorted by two court-appointed advocates, who were there to offer
support. The photographs showed a spacious room, with a small altar
and several round tables and chairs, as if in preparation for a
reception. A bulletin board read, in large red letters, "2015 Congrats
Grads!" A Bible rested undisturbed on one of the tables, but most of
the furniture was riddled with gunfire. The dead lay in an obscene
array about the room. Many in the courtroom wept, again, at that
sight.
                                    
----

I watched Roof during the prosecution's presentation, and it seemed
possible that he had not fully realized the extent of his actions
prior to that moment. In his confession, when the police officers
asked him how many people he had shot, he said, "If I was gonna guess,
five," and he appeared surprised to learn that he had actually killed
nine. But, in the courtroom, he sat impassively--as he did throughout
the trial--his response to the atrocities as inscrutable as his
capacity to have committed them in the first place.

On December 15th, when it was time for Bruck to present his closing
argument, he stood facing the jury with his hands clasped behind his
back. He described Roof as "really a boy, who gives his whole life
over to a belief that there is raging in our society a fight to the
death between black people and white people that is being concealed
and covered up by some sort of vast conspiracy." Bruck added, "He
doesn't seem to think that anybody but him really understands this."

Bruck pointed out that Roof had no escape plan. He used seven clips of
ammunition during the attack, but kept the eighth with him as he
departed, planning, as he said in the church and also during his
confession, to kill himself if escape proved impossible. When he was
arrested, the day after the shooting, in Shelby, North Carolina, he
had been driving toward Nashville. When the police asked him why, he
replied, "Why not? I've never been to Nashville." Because Roof had
refused to have his mental-health history discussed, Bruck was left to
portray him as an alienated young man, not fully capable of
distinguishing between the real world and the hyperbolic paranoid
clamor that he found on the Internet.

Bruck's emphasis on Roof's age wasn't entirely lost on the court. Andy
Savage, the lawyer who represented several of the families in a
separate lawsuit against the federal government, for allowing Roof to
purchase a firearm despite a drug arrest--and who had also,
incidentally, represented Officer Michael Slager in his trial--told me
that the families initially suspected that Roof hadn't acted
alone. "That changed after watching the confession," Savage said. Roof
was not the product of sinister manipulation: his biggest complaint
was his inability to find like-minded patriots--he dismissed other
white nationalists as being all talk. He was, instead, a prodigy of
hate.

The jurors withdrew just after one o'clock. That afternoon, Roof was
convicted of all thirty-three charges. Felicia Sanders nodded silently
each time Judge Gergel uttered the word "guilty."

The court recessed until the new year, when the penalty phase of the
trial started. Roof was representing himself again, and, as his
defense sat nearby, he offered a disjointed opening statement, in
which he told the jurors that he would not lie to them, reiterating
that "there was nothing wrong with me psychologically," and asked them
to ignore everything that they had previously heard from the
defense. He spoke for barely three minutes. He called no witnesses and
offered no evidence.

During the next few days, Richardson called twenty-three witnesses to
attest to the character of the victims and to the impact of their
deaths. The first of them, Jennifer Pinckney, the widow of the pastor,
spoke for nearly three hours about the life they had shared since
meeting as college students. Anthony Thompson talked about the
strength of the bond between him and his wife, Myra; he sighed as he
looked at their wedding photograph, still awed by her beauty. "She was
the one I prayed for," he told the court. At Judge Gergel's prodding,
Richardson had the subsequent witnesses testify for shorter
periods. But nearly all of them brought photographs of their loved
ones, each of which had to be approved by the defense, which, in this
case, was the defendant. The testimonies became a surreal
processional, in which Roof became privy to the personal achievements
and intimate family moments of the deceased. Killing the nine people
was one crime. Being allowed to posthumously get to know them seemed
an altogether different one.

On the afternoon of January 10th, the prosecution rested, and Roof
made a brief closing statement, in which he said, "I felt like I had
to do it. I still feel like I had to do it." The jurors withdrew to
deliberate. They did not, in fact, need long. When the court
reconvened, just three hours later, they recommended the death penalty
for Roof. Gergel thanked the jurors for their service and dismissed
them. The next day, he allowed those family members who had not yet
had a chance to deliver their statements to address the court; most of
the jurors returned to hear them. Gary Washington, through his
sign-language interpreters, told of a sense of foreboding that had
hung over him on the day of the shooting, and how he had anxiously
tried to reach his mother that night. The news of her death hit him so
hard that he had to be hospitalized. "You don't know anything about
us," he said to Roof. "You don't know anything about who we are."

Cynthia Hurd's brother Melvin Graham, a retired laboratory technician,
also spoke. He is taller and thinner than Malcolm Graham, but he has
the same features and the same note of sadness in his eyes. In the
tone of a man who had marshalled the entirety of his will toward
self-control, Melvin told Roof, "You tried to kill my sister, but you
failed." Instead, Roof had immortalized her. As a librarian, she had
helped generations of students and readers, and her death had spurred
an outpouring of recognition for that work: "the Cynthia Graham Hurd
Fellowship, University of South Carolina; the Cynthia Graham Hurd
St. Andrews Regional Library, Charleston, South Carolina; the Cynthia
Graham Hurd Memorial Scholarship, College of Charleston." Graham named
nearly a dozen such tributes. "And that's just what I could remember
off the top of my head," he said. The stories served to remind the
court of what had been lost, but they also must have reassured Roof
that these were indeed the type of blameless, decent people whom he
said he had set out to hurt.

Judge Gergel then turned to the final sentencing. "This trial has
produced no winners, only losers," he said. "This proceeding cannot
give the families what they truly want, the return of their loved
ones." He sentenced Roof to death eighteen times, and handed down an
additional fifteen life sentences, for the hate crimes and other
charges. It took Gergel ten minutes to read the entire sentence. Roof
then stood and requested new counsel to handle an appeal. When Gergel
asked him on what basis he was making the request, Roof smirked and
said of Bruck, "I just don't trust him."  The request was denied.

The State of South Carolina is also due to try Roof, but that trial
has been postponed indefinitely. Last summer, Scarlett Wilson, the
local State Solicitor, balked at the federal trial's taking precedence
over the state prosecution, noting that the federal government hadn't
carried out an execution since 2003. The fate of Dylann Roof will
likely wind through thickets of legal appeals and an equally onerous
state trial before it is ultimately resolved.

The day after the sentencing, I flew to San Francisco. As I checked
into a hotel, I made small talk with the bellman, Aaron Thames, an
African-American in his early forties. I asked if he was a native of
the Bay Area, and he replied, "No, I'm originally from Charleston,
South Carolina." When I told him that I'd just come from the Roof
trial, he looked stricken. He said, "My family knew Reverend Pinckney
and Cynthia Hurd since I was a child. Miss Cynthia is one of my
mother's oldest friends, and when we would visit the library she would
always have books set aside for me and my brother to read."

I had flown almost as far from South Carolina as I could get without
leaving the continental United States, but had encountered the
consequences of Roof's crime in the transparent grief of the first
person I'd spoken with in a new city. The immensity of the pain that
Roof has inflicted upon Charleston is not contained by geography. It
conforms perfectly to the contours of the nation that produced him. 

♦
