The Death of George Floyd, in Context
=====================================

By Jelani Cobb

28 May 2020

The New Yorker Daily Comment

https://www.newyorker.com/news/daily-comment/the-death-of-george-floyd-in-context

![Protesters march through the streets with a sign that says
I CAN'T
BREATHE.](https://media.newyorker.com/photos/5eceed1277dca65581794b46/master/w_2560%2Cc_limit/Cobb-MinneapolisGeorgeFloyd.jpg)

On Tuesday, in Minneapolis, hundreds of protesters, many wearing face
masks to guard against the coronavirus, gathered to protest at the
spot where Floyd died.Photograph by Stephen Maturen / Getty
                    
Two incidents separated by twelve hours and twelve hundred miles have
taken on the appearance of the control and the variable in a grotesque
experiment about race in America. On Monday morning, in New York
City's Central Park, a white woman named Amy Cooper called 911 and
told the dispatcher that an African-American man was threatening
her. The man she was talking about, Christian Cooper, who is no
relation, filmed the call on his phone. They were in the Ramble, a
part of the park favored by bird-watchers, including Christian Cooper,
and he had simply requested that she leash her dog--something that is
required in the area. In the video, before making the call, Ms. Cooper
warns Mr. Cooper that she is "going to tell them there's an
African-American man threatening my life." Her needless inclusion of
the race of the man she fears serves only to summon the ancient
impulse to protect white womanhood from the threats posed by black
men. For anyone with a long enough memory or a recent enough viewing
of the series "[When They See
Us](https://www.newyorker.com/culture/on-television/when-they-see-us-is-both-memorable-political-art-and-misfired-entertainment)," the
locale of this altercation becomes part of the story: we know what
happened to five young black and brown men who were falsely accused of
attacking a white woman in Central Park.

On Monday evening, in Minneapolis, Minnesota, a forty-six-year-old
black man named George Floyd died in a way that highlighted the
implications that calls such as the one Amy Cooper placed can have;
George Floyd is who Christian Cooper might have been. (The police made
no arrests and filed no summons in Central Park. Amy Cooper has
apologized for her actions; she was also fired from her job.) Police
responding to a call from a shopkeeper, about someone trying to pass a
potentially counterfeit bill, arrested Floyd. Surveillance video shows
a compliant man being led away in handcuffs. But cellphone video later
shows a white police officer kneeling on Floyd's neck for seven
minutes, despite protests from onlookers that his life is in
jeopardy. In an echo of the police killing of [Eric
Garner](https://www.newyorker.com/tag/eric-garner), in 2014, Floyd
repeatedly says, "I can't breathe," and then, "I'm about to die." When
the officer eventually removes his knee, Floyd's body is limp and
unresponsive. A person nearby can be heard saying, "They just killed
him." Floyd was taken to a hospital, where he was pronounced dead. A
police statement said that Floyd appeared to be in "medical distress,"
but [made no
mention](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/26/us/george-floyd-minneapolis-police.html) of
his being pinned to the ground with the weight of a police officer
compressing his airway.

The video of Floyd's death is horrific but not surprising; terrible
but not unusual, depicting a kind of incident that is periodically
reenacted in the United States. It's both necessary and, at this
point, pedestrian to observe that policing in this country is mediated
by race. On Tuesday, in Minneapolis, hundreds of protesters, many
wearing face masks to guard against _COVID_-19, braved the
[pandemic](https://www.newyorker.com/tag/coronavirus) to protest at
the spot where Floyd died. Outside a nearby precinct house, police
cars were pelted with rocks, and officers responded by firing tear
gas. But, within twenty-four hours of the video coming to light, the
Minneapolis Police Department fired the officer who had knelt on Floyd
and three others who had been at the scene. Mayor Jacob Frey tweeted
that the firings were "the right call," but here, too, context
matters.

In November, 2015, police responding to calls of a dispute between a
man and a woman in north Minneapolis fatally shot a
twenty-four-year-old African-American man named Jamar Clark. Police
and paramedics on the scene claimed that Clark had resisted arrest and
had attempted to grab an officer's gun; bystanders claimed that he was
handcuffed and on the ground when the shot was fired. Clark's death
was followed by more than two weeks of demonstrations outside the
Fourth Police Precinct in Minneapolis, led by Black Lives Matter; an
attempt to disrupt holiday shopping at the Mall of America, in
protest; and cascading contempt from black residents that, two years
later, factored into Mayor Betsy Hodges losing her reelection bid. In
light of that history, Frey has been unequivocal about police
culpability in Floyd's death. "Being black in America should not be a
death sentence," he said on Tuesday.

The larger question, however, is whether the officers involved will
face any legal consequences. The Twin Cities area has been an outsized
part of the dialogue about the police use of force. The year after
Clark's death, Philando Castile was fatally shot in Falcon Heights,
Minnesota, by a police officer who was alarmed because Castile had a
gun in his car, even though he had identified himself as a licensed
gun owner. (Castile's girlfriend recorded the aftermath of the
shooting on her phone.) In 2017, Justine Damond was fatally shot by a
police officer who was responding to her own call about a possible
assault taking place behind her Minneapolis home. No charges were
brought against officers in Clark's death. Jeronimo Yanez, the officer
who killed Castile, was fired from the department, but was acquitted
of second-degree-manslaughter charges. Mohamed Noor, the officer who
shot Damond, was convicted of third-degree murder and second-degree
manslaughter, and was sentenced to twelve and a half years in
prison. The Damond case was atypical, both in that it involved the
fatal shooting of a white woman by a black officer of Somali descent,
and that Damond was an Australian citizen, which generated
international pressure for a conviction in the case. No charges were
brought against Officer Daniel Pantaleo in the death of Eric Garner,
on Staten Island, whose arrest was also recorded on video by a
bystander, and has been widely referenced since Floyd's death. (He was
fired from the department in 2019.)  By odd coincidence,"[American
Trial](https://vimeo.com/268064217)_,"_ a film that features a mock
trial of Pantaleo for murder, was just released.

The investigation into Floyd's death also exists in the context of an
ongoing investigation into the death of [Ahmaud
Arbery](https://www.newyorker.com/news/daily-comment/we-are-living-in-the-age-of-the-black-panic-defense),
a twenty-five-year-old African-American who was shot in southeast
Georgia when two men attempted to enact a citizen's arrest while a
third recorded a video of the incident. There is yet another
investigation of fatal police force in Louisville, Kentucky, where
Breonna Taylor, a twenty-six-year-old African-American E.M.T., was
shot to death in her apartment by officers who were conducting a drug
raid at what her family said was the wrong address.

There is more to be said about the burgeoning genre of videos
capturing the deaths of black Americans, and the complex combination
of revulsion and compulsion that accompanies their viewing. They are
the macabre documentary of current events, but the question remains
about whether they do more to humanize or to objectify the unwilling
figures at the center of their narratives. Death is too intimate a
phenomenon to not be distorted by a mass audience. Yesterday, very few
of us knew who George Floyd was, what he cared about, how he lived his
life. Today, we know him no better save for the grim way in which that
life met its end.

~
