Ahmaud Arbery's Killing Is a Reminder of the Difference Between Non-Racist and Anti-Racist
==========================================================================================

By Jenn M. Jackson

11 May 2020

Teen Vogue Speak On It

https://www.teenvogue.com/story/ahmaud-arbery-killing-reminder-difference-between-non-racist-anti-racist

_**[Speak On It**_](http://www.teenvogue.com/tag/speak-on-it) _is a
Teen Vogue column by Jenn M. Jackson, whose queer Black feminist
perspective explores how today's social and political life is
influenced by generations of racial and gender (dis)order. In this
article, she examines how the lack of response to the repeated
killings of unarmed Black people stems from a deep fear of dealing
with racism head-on._

![Image of a young black girl right of frame facing away from the
camera as she considers a memorial of flowers
and...](https://assets.teenvogue.com/photos/5eb9771f8a81f33f82b14d28/16:9/w_2560%2Cc_limit/ahmaud%252520arbery%252520non-racist%252520anti-racist%252520teen%252520vogue%252520op-ed.jpg)
Sean Rayford/Getty Images
      
As the world continues to unpack the killing of Ahmaud Arbery, the
horror of this moment is a reminder of some of the ugliest aspects of
our society, offering a chance to ask how we can end the racist system
that has made killings like this all too familiar. Now, as before, the
difference between being non-racist and anti-racist remains vital.

On February 26, 2012, 17-year-old [Trayvon
Martin](https://www.teenvogue.com/story/sixth-anniversary-trayvon-martins-killing-activists-ignited-a-movement)
was killed by vigilante George Zimmerman while walking back to his
father's fiancee's home in the city of Sanford, Florida. Trayvon was
leaving a local convenience store carrying Skittles and an iced tea
with him when Zimmerman followed him through the neighborhood. In a
911 emergency call placed that night, Zimmerman referred to Trayvon as
"[suspicious](https://abcnews.go.com/US/george-zimmerman-jury-hears-key-911-tapes-start/story?id=19470272)"
before confronting and killing him.

I've never looked at hoodies or Skittles the same way since that day.

That was eight years ago. Sadly, racism and violence against Black
people in the United States remains heartbreakingly similar nearly a
decade later.

News broke last week that 25-year-old Arbery was killed under eerily
familiar circumstances as Trayvon. Arbery was [shot and
killed](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/08/us/ahmaud-arbery-shooting-georgia.html)
on February 23 in Brunswick, Georgia. He was [jogging in his own
neighborhood](https://www.teenvogue.com/story/ahmaud-arbery-shooting-georgia)
when 64-year-old Gregory McMichael and his 34-year-old son, Travis,
grabbed two guns, got in their truck, and pursued Arbery. After a
brief confrontation, McMichaels and his son shot Arbery several times,
killing him. Local authorities did not arrest the McMichaels until May
7, after footage of the killing went viral. Both men have been charged
with murder and aggravated assault, according to a press release from
the [Georgia Bureau of
Investigation](https://gbi.georgia.gov/press-releases/2020-05-06/ahmaud-arbery-death-investigation).

Both Trayvon and Arbery were on what should've been unassuming trips
through familiar streets. They were both running away from their armed
assailants before they were killed. Both killings set off a wave of
pain and mourning online as people try to raise awareness about their
deaths and the grisly details break their hearts.

In both instances, it took this kind of public outcry to pressure
local officials into making an arrest. It took a lot of publicity,
including activists creating an online petition calling for his
arrest, before Zimmerman was charged and taken into custody in
April 2012. Then, he [submitted himself to
police](https://www.cnn.com/2013/06/05/us/trayvon-martin-shooting-fast-facts/index.html)
on June 3 that year, after being released on bond. Martin and Arbery
were killed in neighborhoods they frequented or lived in. Neither of
them were strangers there. Yet, because of the color of their skin,
armed assailants deemed them criminal, dangerous, and out of
place. And, when they were killed, the officials meant to bring their
killers to justice at first did nothing. No arrests. No big press
releases. No disruptions to the status quo.

That's what happens in a racist society that sees the killings of
Black people as par for the course.

Unfortunately, as these killings persist, many white Americans remain
silent. Rather than engaging in behaviors that disrupt the
anti-Blackness facing Black Americans seemingly continuously mourning
the loss of Black lives, they disengage from "race-related" issues
altogether.

It was freedom fighter Angela Y. Davis [who
said](https://nmaahc.si.edu/learn/talking-about-race/topics/being-antiracist),
"In a racist society it is not enough to be non-racist, we must be
anti-racist." And, there are important differences between non-racism
and anti-racism. To be non-racist is to simply abstain from
participation in racist beliefs or actions. It is the decision not to
participate in racist ideas about others. That's it. It has no social
component. No manifestation within one's social networks. It's a
laissez-faire political attitude on race that might prevent further
harm, but does nothing to repair existing damage.

Advertisement

To be anti-racist is to actively work toward the eradication of racism
wherever it exists. Anti-racism requires intention and
disruption. Anti-racist work is not done quietly nor is it performed
only once. Anti-racist work is more than Facebook posts and Twitter
threads. Being anti-racist is about putting one's self at personal
risk so that the risk for Black people is reduced.

Being anti-racist frequently requires discomfort. While a non-racist
person might be uncomfortable at a family dinner where racist
invective is being spewed, an anti-racist person has to [embrace the
discomfort of standing up to racist family
members](https://www.teenvogue.com/story/thanksgiving-holiday-family-politics). Those
of us targeted by racism today already live uncomfortable lives, and I
don't see enough comfort in a society that simply stops being racist
unless it also destroys its racist elements.

In a truly anti-racist society, Trayvon and Arbery would still be
here. But, even in the society we live in, it shouldn't take mass
outcry from Black organizers and activists around the globe to force
investigators to pursue their killers. Instead, white Americans should
invest their time in concrete ways to fight racism every day so that
these killings are no longer the norm.

First, white people have to name racism when it happens. On May 8,
Taylor Swift
[tweeted](https://twitter.com/taylorswift13/status/1258508331280240640),
"I'm absolutely devastated and horrified by the senseless, cold
blooded, racially motivated killing of Ahmaud
Arbery. #JusticeForAhmaud." While perhaps well-intentioned, Swift's
tweet commits one of the hallmark mistakes of failing to be
anti-racist. The killing of Arbery was not "racially motivated." Nor
was it, as people so often refer to such incidents, _race-related,
racial, racially tinged,_ or _race-adjacent._ It was _racist._

Arbery's killing was another example of how our society upholds
anti-Blackness and white supremacy. By continuing to substitute in
watered-down language for the words "racist," and "racism," many white
Americans only lessen accountability on those people who harm Black
Americans. In the process, they also put the burden on Black people to
do the work of identifying racism when it happens.

Second, white people have to actually take measurable actions toward
building Black futures and fighting against systemic racism. Listen
to, support, and fund organizations that have long identified policing
and mass incarceration as threats to Black life. A good example is
[National Bail
Out](https://secure.actblue.com/donate/freeblackmamas2020), a
Black-led abolitionist organization dedicated to ending mass
incarceration. Another example is [Black Youth Project
100](https://www.byp100.org/), a chapter-based national organization
working toward the liberation of all Black people.

White people should also help pass policy to defund police
organizations and reroute those dollars toward initiatives that
directly sustain Black life. For example, [anti-racist organizers in
Seattle](https://www.yesmagazine.org/social-justice/2017/03/09/defunding-police-how-antiracist-organizers-got-seattle-to-listen/)
helped to redirect funds from police toward education and affordable
housing in 2017. These are just a few ways to engage in anti-racist
work.

Being non-racist will not change anything. In fact, it will only make
matters worse. On the other hand, being anti-racist can save Black
lives and build Black futures. And, there's no better time to truly
commit to doing anti-racist work than now.

~
