Beyond the Hashtag: How to Take Anti-Racist Action in Your Life
===============================================================

_In this op-ed, Zyahna Bryant --Â a Charlottesville-based activist,
organizer, and social impact strategist -- offers insight into how
people can take anti-racist action._

By Zyahna Bryant

28 May 2020

Teen Vogue Politics

![Image of a Black protester holding a pink sign reading in
handwritten black lettering BLACK LIVES MATTER at a street
protest](https://assets.teenvogue.com/photos/5ecfeace6f6a9fa1c6ce0666/16:9/w_2560%2Cc_limit/anti-racist%252520actioon%252520guide%252520teen%252520vogue%252520george%252520floyd%252520minneapolis.jpg)
KEREM YUCEL/AFP via Getty Images
      
In the wake of the deaths of [Ahmaud
Arbery](https://www.teenvogue.com/story/ahmaud-arbery-killing-reminder-difference-between-non-racist-anti-racist),
[Breonna
Taylor](https://www.cnn.com/2020/05/21/us/breonna-taylor-death-police-changes-trnd/index.html),
[Nina
Pop](https://www.advocate.com/crime/2020/5/06/trans-woman-nina-pop-stabbed-death-missouri),
[Sean
Reed](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/07/us/sean-reed-indianapolis-shooting.html),
and now [George
Floyd](https://www.teenvogue.com/story/george-floyd-death-thousands-protest-minneapolis-police-violence),
it is imperative that we have a conversation about where we, as a
society, go from here. It seems there is an overwhelming expectation
that Black activists and organizers will say something profound about
Black death, but what I have to offer is not some profound truth but a
simple request: Take action.

I feel this way because, for years, I've found myself constantly
reflecting on how long we've been having these conversations about
police brutality. I look at pictures from protests that I had in a
camera roll from 2013, 2015, 2016, and 2018. For so long people have
tried to paint these killings of unarmed Black people as isolated
incidents, despite the movement that has worked to clearly establish
the links between them.

What I've also seen is the tendency to lean into and perpetuate the
narrative that there are "good apples" and "bad apples" when it comes
to cops. However, there is also an inability to point out and directly
cite the fact that the system of U.S. policing as we now know it is
[rooted](https://theconversation.com/the-racist-roots-of-american-policing-from-slave-patrols-to-traffic-stops-112816)
and [deeply entangled
in](https://www.cnn.com/2019/01/18/us/nypd-black-lives-matter-surveillance/index.html)
the need to control and surveil Black people. This system is a pillar
of white supremacy. Its modern manifestation dates back to [chattel
slavery](https://plsonline.eku.edu/insidelook/brief-history-slavery-and-origins-american-policing),
[post-Civil War
Reconstruction](https://www.splcenter.org/sites/default/files/Ku-Klux-Klan-A-History-of-Racism.pdf),
and can be specifically found in [Black
codes](https://www.pbs.org/tpt/slavery-by-another-name/themes/black-codes/)
and [vagrancy
laws](https://www.crf-usa.org/brown-v-board-50th-anniversary/southern-black-codes.html)
that were prominent in the South.

The inability to reckon with violent racism and the long list of
historical wrongs found at the core of many political and social
systems that make up our nation is exhibited in the incidents that we
see today. All white people seem to have to do is see a Black person
in a public space, [claim that they feel
threatened](https://www.teenvogue.com/story/central-park-video-white-woman-threatening-black-man-police-call)
solely by their presence, and then, just like that, [the fate of a
Black person is in the hands of a police
officer](https://www.teenvogue.com/story/calling-the-police-on-black-people-can-put-them-in-danger)
and an entire system that has been structured to target them. This is
fundamentally why we say Black Lives Matter: Not only is it a signal
to call out the injustices that have prompted us to continue to take
to the streets to defend ourselves, it is simply the act of saying
that we **do** matter in a world where it's obvious some people
believe some lives matter more than ours. We simply want to be
recognized as human.

Hashtags and online discourse aren't enough in this time. Many of the
organizers who do racial justice and equity work are exhausted from
revisiting these conversations week after week and year after year
with no sustained push for change from allies beyond trending
hashtags. Meanwhile, turning to the ballot box necessitates an ongoing
conversation about how racism and white supremacy permeate every facet
of our democracy. This all means that starting racial justice work can
be hard and uncomfortable for many, but if not now, when?

Anti-racist work isn't easy, and amid the COVID-19 crisis, things look
a bit different than they used to. But there are still powerful ways
to show up.

Educate yourself!
-----------------

Reading the work of Black scholars who break down issues of the
justice system, policing, and prison abolition are great places to
start. Some of my personal recommendations include works by [Angela
Davis](https://guides.library.cornell.edu/davis/publications), [Assata
Shakur](https://www.thriftbooks.com/a/assata-shakur/201881/),
[Michelle Alexander](https://newjimcrow.com/about-the-author),
[Keeanga-Yamahtta
Taylor](https://www.haymarketbooks.org/authors/214-keeanga-yamahtta-taylor),
[Ida
B. Wells](https://www.thriftbooks.com/a/ida-b-wells-barnett/420054/),
and _[The 1619 Project,_ edited by Nikole
Hannah-Jones](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/08/14/magazine/1619-america-slavery.html).

Resources like the [Abolitionist
Futures](https://abolitionistfutures.com/pre-conference-events/abolitionist-reading-discussion-group/reading-list/)
conference, the [Prison
Culture](http://www.usprisonculture.com/blog/essential-pic-reading-list/)
blog, and the [African American Intellectual History
Society](https://www.aaihs.org/prison-abolition-syllabus/) have
compiled extensive reading lists on policing, incarceration, and the
racism baked into both systems. Other groups, including Critical
Resistance, have published documents like an "[Abolition Organizing
Toolkit](http://criticalresistance.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/06/CR-Abolitionist-Toolkit-online.pdf)."
And in Minneapolis, [MPD150](https://www.mpd150.com/about/) is a group
of local grassroots organizers pushing for the abolition of the city's
police department, and it also has [a handy zine for frequently asked
questions about
abolition.](https://www.mpd150.com/wp-content/themes/mpd150/assets/faq_zine.pdf)

Invest time and resources in on-the-ground community abolitionist efforts.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the current situation in Minneapolis, these efforts can include
Freedom Funds like the [Minnesota Freedom
Fund](https://minnesotafreedomfund.org/donate), which directly
supports activists and organizers who are doing work on the
ground. The Minnesota Freedom Fund is "supporting a movement
constellation of formations," [according to its
Twitter](https://twitter.com/MNFreedomFund/status/1265735264242225152),
where they also advise donating to [the Black Visions
Collective](https://www.payit2.com/fundraiser/98548), [Reclaim the
Block](https://secure.everyaction.com/zae4prEeKESHBy0MKXTIcQ2), and
[Unicorn Riot](https://unicornriot.ninja/donate/). And as the Floyd
family mourns their loss, you can [offer direct support to them
through GoFundMe](https://www.gofundme.com/f/georgefloyd) and by
[supporting the work of groups like
MPD150](https://www.mpd150.com/donate/).

Respect the leaders on the ground who have been doing the work and
leading the way. As documented by [the National Bail Fund
Network](https://www.communityjusticeexchange.org/nbfn-directory),
freedom and bond funds exist all over the country, and they need
support even when police brutality isn't in the headlines.

Get involved locally.
---------------------

This is an important national conversation that gets renewed every
time another city is seized by racist horror, but good politics start
locally. Sign yourself up for a local listserv or organization that is
working to create a lasting organizing infrastructure in your
community. If you need help getting started, look for local news
reports of anti-racist protest actions, find out who is organizing
them, and if you can support their ongoing work.

Uplift and center the voices of the most marginalized people.
-------------------------------------------------------------

In all conversations, it is crucial that we uplift and center the
voices and experiences of the people who are most impacted by these
issues. Lift up and listen to people like [Tami
Sawyer](https://twitter.com/tamisawyer), [Da'Shaun
Harrison](https://twitter.com/DaShaunLH), [Delaney
Vandergrift](https://twitter.com/delaneypv15), [Clarissa
Brooks](https://twitter.com/ClarissaMBrooks), [Bree Newsome
Bass](https://twitter.com/BreeNewsome), and many others. Say the names
of Black women who often go unheard of and unseen on major news and
media platforms, and make room for Black women to speak for
themselves.

Take action in your own life.
-----------------------------

Name and call out racism, misogynoir, transphobia, homophobia,
queerphobia, fatphobia, and white supremacy in all its forms. It may
be uncomfortable to confront your parents, your boss, your teacher, or
your peers, but that's no excuse not to do it. Fighting oppression is
uncomfortable work by its nature, and working to make change in the
systems you're already a part of is as important as plugging into
conversations about systems you don't interact with regularly.

Why does it matter?
-------------------

It is important to be part of building the organizing infrastructure
in our communities so that the next time there's another hashtag
mourning another death, we already have the playbook to act. We have
the leaders and gatekeepers (who do the work) positioned to continue
to lead in a sustained way, but they need the support of everyone who
wants to see an end to these racist systems.

So many have wanted to shy away from discussing race, but we _have_ to
talk about white supremacy. We _have_ to talk about police violence
and the surveillance and profiling of Black folks. Until we can truly
discuss all of this, we are failing to address the root causes of
these issues. Now is not the time to recoil.

We are so tired of trying to prove our humanity. It is time for
everyone to step up and act. Respectability, silence, and turning the
other cheek to "avoid conflict" is no longer enough.

~
