Together, You Can Redeem the Soul of Our Nation
===============================================

![alt](https://i0.wp.com/beniciaindependent.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/JohnRLewis_Though_I_am_gone-nyt20200730.jpg)

_Though I am gone, I urge you to answer the highest calling of your
heart and stand up for what you truly believe._

By John Lewis

30 July 2020

The New York Times

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/30/opinion/john-lewis-civil-rights-america.html

Audio: [Together, You Can Redeem the Soul of Our Nation](lewis-2020-redeem.mp3)

_Mr. Lewis, the civil rights leader who died on July 17, wrote this
essay shortly before his death, to be published upon the day of his
funeral._

**W**hile my time here has now come to an end, I want you to know that
in the last days and hours of my life you inspired me. You filled me
with hope about the next chapter of the great American story when you
used your power to make a difference in our society. Millions of
people motivated simply by human compassion laid down the burdens of
division. Around the country and the world you set aside race, class,
age, language and nationality to demand respect for human dignity.

That is why I had to visit Black Lives Matter Plaza in Washington,
though I was admitted to the hospital the following day. I just had to
see and feel it for myself that, after many years of silent witness,
the truth is still marching on.

Emmett Till was my George Floyd. He was my Rayshard Brooks, Sandra
Bland and Breonna Taylor. He was 14 when he was killed, and I was only
15 years old at the time. I will never ever forget the moment when it
became so clear that he could easily have been me. In those days, fear
constrained us like an imaginary prison, and troubling thoughts of
potential brutality committed for no understandable reason were the
bars.

Though I was surrounded by two loving parents, plenty of brothers,
sisters and cousins, their love could not protect me from the unholy
oppression waiting just outside that family circle. Unchecked,
unrestrained violence and government-sanctioned terror had the power
to turn a simple stroll to the store for some Skittles or an innocent
morning jog down a lonesome country road into a nightmare. If we are
to survive as one unified nation, we must discover what so readily
takes root in our hearts that could rob Mother Emanuel Church in South
Carolina of her brightest and best, shoot unwitting concertgoers in
Las Vegas and choke to death the hopes and dreams of a gifted
violinist like Elijah McClain.

Like so many young people today, I was searching for a way out, or
some might say a way in, and then I heard the voice of Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr. on an old radio. He was talking about the philosophy
and discipline of nonviolence. He said we are all complicit when we
tolerate injustice. He said it is not enough to say it will get better
by and by. He said each of us has a moral obligation to stand up,
speak up and speak out. When you see something that is not right, you
must say something. You must do something. Democracy is not a
state. It is an act, and each generation must do its part to help
build what we called the Beloved Community, a nation and world society
at peace with itself.

Ordinary people with extraordinary vision can redeem the soul of
America by getting in what I call good trouble, necessary
trouble. Voting and participating in the democratic process are
key. The vote is the most powerful nonviolent change agent you have in
a democratic society. You must use it because it is not
guaranteed. You can lose it.

You must also study and learn the lessons of history because humanity
has been involved in this soul-wrenching, existential struggle for a
very long time. People on every continent have stood in your shoes,
through decades and centuries before you. The truth does not change,
and that is why the answers worked out long ago can help you find
solutions to the challenges of our time. Continue to build union
between movements stretching across the globe because we must put away
our willingness to profit from the exploitation of others.

Though I may not be here with you, I urge you to answer the highest
calling of your heart and stand up for what you truly believe. In my
life I have done all I can to demonstrate that the way of peace, the
way of love and nonviolence is the more excellent way. Now it is your
turn to let freedom ring.

When historians pick up their pens to write the story of the 21st
century, let them say that it was your generation who laid down the
heavy burdens of hate at last and that peace finally triumphed over
violence, aggression and war. So I say to you, walk with the wind,
brothers and sisters, and let the spirit of peace and the power of
everlasting love be your guide.

~

John Lewis, the civil rights leader and congressman who died on July
17, wrote this essay shortly before his death.

