January 12th 1999 my name is hound huge
my grandfather bongs guitar the chefs
and now I am 101 yo
they are voices that break a silence we
will say we belong to people you sellers
like yourself horses how witnesses to a
time we only know from photographs and
the witan were but they were there then
I stood on that ticket face all day long
Kingdom told you going back the Phantom
Zone two different races I'm told
console didn't go born to slaver we
didn't have no property we didn't have
no room and now we can hear them speak
because you're nothing but a dog you're
not a thing but ago found voices the
slaves life told by those who lived from
ABC news
this is Nightline reporting from
Washington Ted Koppel imagine for a
moment what it'll be like for Americans
two or three generations hence assuming
of course that we hadn't blown ourselves
back into the Stone Age and that someone
can still figure out what format
everything was in assuming all of that
our great-great-grandchildren will know
more about us than any generation in the
history of the world has ever known
about its ancestors there'll be
photographs of course black and white
and color audio cassettes and in a few
families eight and sixteen millimeter
film and there will be thousands upon
thousands of miles of videotape on which
we will have recorded everything that
struck us as interesting or funny or
important about the milestones of our
lives and those of our friends and
families they will be able to see and
hear us long after we are dead imagine
if we could only do the same if we could
only bring back the voices and images
and most important of all the memories
of those who lived a hundred or more
years ago well brace yourselves for a
minor miracle for reasons I'll explain
as we go along we have the voices and
the memories and a few black-and-white
photographs to go along of some men and
women who were born some of them a
hundred and fifty years ago and what
makes these recollections all the more
remarkable is that these men and women
had been bought and sold like so much
livestock

tell you the truth when I think over
today I don't know how I'm living I
remember that this is Wales look like to
me I can it says all our lives and
mother mostly fishing history following
the slave they know nothing about
reading write that all that I know the
teachings of mine you must marry mrs.
mom Jim didn't wear gold she has a
physical death star just like he's
turned from monkey loose in one go

they
are haunting voices from the past not
actors reading a script or scholars
reading a text but the actual voices of
men and women Americans who were born in
slavery

my name is how huge I was born in charge
sir Alfred Enya my grandfather Blanca
taught ourselves my grandfather were a
hundred and fifteen years old when he
died and now I am 101 you 

incredible as
it seems we are listening to the voices
of ex-slaves telling of their lives in
bondage
men like fountain Hughes on the living
conditions of slaves in Virginia in the
1860s when he was a teenager

hope you
didn't have a bid when you save he won't
sit on the floor
solitude just like a lot of wild people
we didn't we didn't know nothing didn't
I a joke a notebook 

women like Laura
Smalley describing the makeshift church
where slaves worshipped on a big
plantation in East Texas

all the Chaffee
would have dealer tube tell the water
fitness like this thing is you know that
would kick your voice and they would
they would have chased around at to ball
I'm getting rounded to 

or Harriet Smith
remembering what she saw as a small girl
during the final days of the Civil War

said I stood on that picket fence
all day long seeing them soldiers going
back to silence on different places
solid solely colored soldiers and joy my
long Baja ah-hoo - Stewart has writes

these recorded memories were among
thousands of interviews done with X
lives in the 1930s and 40s the majority
were written interviews published in
pamphlets and books a handful were
recorded on the latest equipment of the
day 200-pound portable recorders that a
hearty band of folklorists lugged across
the South 

you had a go free you could
write I have 

these recordings one
scratchy distant filled with a crackle
and pop of that primitive equipment
nothing worries me I'm not my head ain't
even white 

now have been cleaned up
through the magic of modern technology
digitized

I'm the oldest one that I know that's livin

the age of the computer has
reached back to polish a memory from
another century no 150 years ago

you
remember slavery days I remember I buy
food and all the name of all the
children call every one the children's
name did you belong even the days of all

the results of these digitally enhanced
recordings are arresting almost
unbelievable the idea of hearing the
voices of actual slaves from the
plantations of the Old South is as
powerful as startling really as if you
could hear Abraham Lincoln or robert e
lee's speak listen again to fountain
Hughes who was born in 1848

transcript: we were saying we brown people they sellers like yourself
horses without hope nor again auction bench and their four children
upon the bitch who beat on you deceivers you've been an academy

much of what
these three former slaves say may at
first seem unremarkable much of what
they say may surprise and upset and
their calm demeanor is at odds with the
evil and violence we associate with
slavery here is 91 year old Texan Laura
Smalley talking in the 1940s about the
outcome of a tussle between two women
one black one white one slave one
mistress the mistress tried to slap the
slave but the black woman pushed her
into a chair Laura Smalley was a girl at
the time but she remembers vividly what
happened to the black woman when the
master came home 

transcript: but I think a woman
total woman cat in the peach orchard and
whip them and no just tired of had this
waiting around a pizza was a tree I
remember that this is well look like to
me I can't and round a tree and work
them and what she couldn't do them but
just kick of thinking on this kick of me
but it just had a close all down so a
tional didn't have a plum naked but they
had a toe down so a waist and they were
not ended football you can own and snuff
the pipe out on you know snuff pipe out
on us you know the ambles in the paper
where you'll see the pipe smoking all
out on
this is ABC News Nightline brought to
you by First Union this is a world only
a few know well
world of risk and uncertainty where the
roads can take you to success prosperity
for sometimes - no place at all
this is the financial world
decades banks and investment firms in
mountainous size have rolled the land
yet high above the horizon another
mountain has risen a mountain called
First Union with 16 million customers
the nation's eighth largest brokerage
and sixth largest bank for new
perspective of the financial world
come to the mountain called First Union
or if you prefer the mountain will come
to you
2020 Wednesday our hidden cameras show
you children living in a kind of hell
some drugged confined a journey you will
never forget on 2020 winter the People's
Choice Awards oh they love me they
really love me
the nation's TV critics with the best
night viewers for quality television I'm
not what oh we got a motor all we have
to do is give the jury something to
believe they're all saying the same
thing the best shows on television or on
ABC
da
why do more Americans get their news
from ABC News
ork in the city
are still
enough said ABC News more debt more news
more reasonable watch the best
what is remarkable in the taped
recollections of these ex-slaves is the
lack of anger remember though that these
are the recollections of people who were
children or teenagers during slavery
remember - how intimidating it is for
most of us today
to have a microphone or camera thrust at
us and to be asked questions on the
street it must have been even more
daunting for poor blacks living in a
highly segregated south to be asked by
white strangers using a strange machine
to talk candidly about being slaves for
all that it is startling how much the
ex-slaves reveal fear hunger unrelenting
work but also fondness for masters
perhaps even love Harriet Smith's family
for example
were the only slaves of an East Texas
farmer and his family they lived in a
cabin next to their masters in
circumstances not markedly different
even attended the same church only at
different times
IRA's lousing city grew by folk stretch
of in time she the white folks would
have Church in the morning then they'd
let the color people have churches a
church and ease your slavery the same
time Laura Smalley lived in the same
area of Texas as Harriet Smith near the
Brazos River one of more than 100 slaves
on a big cotton plantation religion
offered no consolation to the slaves
here because the master for bad them the
practice of religion and there was held
to pay if the master caught them at
prayer it all had no choice no analogy
and old monster come along with one of
them
one of those uh was there having checked
around it - he's down praying the old
monster come in he just a prayer he
community didn't told him get up from
there you didn't get up he disappeared
they say there were monster Commission
told me he quit praying intended ask me
Lord Hamlet son almost my so much old
woman with a book is how it happened I
saw an old monster and that old master
what Damini camera wouldn't get up here
just French you notice that pushing on
putting hit you with a sling
he just prayers little monster old
MARSOC step back sell bread money kicked
you naked we'd like to kick you naked
nigga never stop praying I know he's had
he had gone leaving pray it won't
leaving pray didn't go to good stuff the
plantation on which Smalley was a slave
sounds brutal she recalls scrambling
with other children for food from a huge
wooden tray like a hog trough all of me
no would get around that she would spoon
and eat city like moisture super
something like that no I'm chilling it
around and just eat fountain Hughes
tells his interviewer about the
relentless round of work for him on a
Virginia plantation time cut tobacco
don't you cut all night on over to you
you could
watching your hangover night on he
didn't matter but you tithe who tied
your friend to save your time it was
cotton not tobacco that solidified
slavery though the invention of the
cotton gin at the end of the 18th
century made its processing easy but the
crop still needed enormous amounts of
unskilled labour control of the slave
and his labor through laws and
regulations became paramount fountain
Hughes talks about one of those controls
the past system now I couldn't move you
here across the street well I couldn't
open nobody's house that I have a look
for something from my master and if I
had that pass at work or pass if I had
that pass I could go wherever he send me
and I'd have to be back you never know
who are we said Rizzoli they'd give me
another pass not be led back so it's a
shoehorn even Emancipation didn't truly
free the slaves freedom freed slaves for
more travail the end of the Civil War
found many cast adrift without skills
and no place to go
and the Yankees who freed them weren't
always seen as benevolent liberators I
remember when the Yankees came along to
all the good horses in to holy sword a
warning
flower shoots up out in the room let it
go down the river and you know the
people who have not illegal but they
don't have the ex-slaves left one hell
for another perhaps an even more
dangerous one no longer property they
didn't have the protections afforded
property when we were slaves we couldn't
either see then forgot free we did not
leave you and whether she did she hunted
places and found this out for Darwin one
and we didn't have no property we have
no one you love no well nothing we
didn't have nothing no no no just for
lady cattle this tandem and get along
the best record in Texas the slaves
weren't told they were free until two
months after the war ended
Smalley remembers that her masters gave
the slaves a dinner and then they were
free I don't hide the outside is a
functional thing we didn't know they
just thought you know we'll just feed
this you know and them didn't we're
going see after field room that time
just like he turns a mouse you know then
while ago but this what you stayed in
for the group told us all just like you
know it's on our camera in the
narratives the slaves used an
interesting phrase for the end of
slavery they say when the break came
good times easy times were not at hand
the trials for millions of black
Americans didn't end in 1865 they
continued Laura Smalley and her family
became sharecroppers Harriet Smith's
first husband was killed by whites
during the Reconstruction probably
because of his political organizing
fountain Hughes went north to Baltimore
and worked at numerous jobs including
hauling manure not an enviable job but
it was the job of a free man
whenever car batteries are put to the
test America's most trusted lives up to
its name
diehard what's under your hood
Tweety I really don't think you guys are
relative I do
MCI five since Sundays helps me keep Oh
My Space Jam buddies he doesn't even
have feathers but we have the same waist
name it's just five cents a minute every
minute every Sunday along with low rates
all week long but just because he's
Larry Bird and you're Tweety Bird
doesn't mean you relate it I don't know
we work an awful lot alike call 1-800
Sundays to become an MCI customer let me
help you I'll do it I can do it
arthritis has claimed these hands but
take comfort in the medicine arthritis
experts recommend first Tylenol
Arthritis extended relief it lasts up to
twice as long as regular aspirin without
irritating your stomach
Tylenol Arthritis take comfort in our
strength
welcome to the most exciting show in
late night the only show with Lizzy
sleepover politically incorrect with
Bill Maher coming up on ABC from birth
to age three are the most important
years in a child's brain development the
time that defines who they become
John Henry Faulk was among those who
interviewed ex-slaves Faulk kept
detailed notebooks of his travels and
interviews with former slaves and even
tried once to pass for blank he told an
interviewer just before his death in
1979 I really I really out getting cum
educated on blacks and they promise if
we call them colored folks if some of
you think you recognize the name John
Henry Faulk
you're right he was a famous radio
personality in the 1950s he was also
denounced and eventually blacklisted for
among other things championing the
rights of blacks to vote but we're
getting ahead of ourselves we can thank
the depression for the existence of the
slave narratives that is when John Henry
Faulk folklorist John Lomax his son
Allen and writers like Zora Neale
Hurston the celebrated Harlem
Renaissance writer were touring the
south to gather accounts of
african-american folk traditions the
subject of slavery was not on their
minds nobody was going around saying oh
now we've got another former slave
recording but then little by little they
they started becoming a category known
to scholars and linguists the audio
tapes of the ex-slaves have been in the
archives of the Library of Congress and
various libraries around the country
since the late 1940s Kathy Farnell who
works with the Institute of language and
culture in Clanton Alabama is one of the
people responsible for the clarity of
the ex-slave narrative tapes now part of
a recently released audio and book
package called remembering slavery
produced by the Smithsonian Institution
and Public Radio International what I
found out was that the technology did
not exist to bring these recordings up
to broadcast quality by taking out the
background static that technology got
invented in the early 1990s hearing the
tapes had a profound effect on everyone
who worked with them well I was truly
amazed when I first heard the recorded
interviews I just fell in love with
fountain he had the type of emotions
that that I really liked he had anger
and so it felt good to me it validated
for me my feeling that this was a
horrible horrible thing to happen to any
people but John Henry Faulk may have
experienced the most profound effect he
was a graduate student when he
interviewed the former slaves including
the two women you hear in this broadcast
himself interviewed just before he died
in 1979 Falk was going on about how he
believed in giving blacks the right to
go to school giving them the right to
vote giving them the right to go into
anything they qualified for and then he
said he experienced an epiphany yes now
on a lag in time with this old black man
and this telling what a different kind
of white man I was I remember him
looking at me fair saddling kind of
sweetly and condescending and say you
know you still got the disease honey I
know you think you're cured but you're
not cured you can't give me the right to
be a human being I'm born with that
right now you can keep me from having
that if you've got all the policemen and
all the jobs on your side you can
deprive me up but you can give it to me
cuz I've born with it just like it was
my god it had a profound effect on me
I'm furious with him but the more
reflect out the more profoundly in
effect I realized this was where it
really was but the final word belongs to
fountain Hughes when asked by his
interviewer which he would rather be
free or slave he answered with intensity
rather be you know what I'd rather do
you find so any not that I'd ever be a
slave again my table ended all right
away
you could hear nothing but a dull
another city but ago I'll be back with a
closing thought in a moment
remember life in the fast lane i do'
first you meet then you get married and
things slow down yeah right to help you
keep up drive a supercharged Regal GS
sport sedan plenty of room standard
traction control and the most power in
its class hey you haven't slowed down
why should your car
Reagle by Buick official car of the
supercharged family there's a new force
you can use to help you have small
business introducing Sprint business
flex a new communications plan you can
adapt to help your business grow and
toll-free long-distance global service
and more business Lex adapts along with
you you're in control so charge ahead
and feel free to make the right moves
plus with business flex you get a
monthly bonus that can grow as you grow
so your success can really pay off
188 sprint fish we help your business do
more business
what I want there's no telling what a
storm may bring with it
ABC is taking that worry by storm
stephen king's dawn of the century
february 1999 see it first on ABC then
read the book
to
good
I'm so glad we made it look how far
we've come
dharma & greg ABC Wednesday 8:00 7:00
central Sunday he inspired millions have
dr. King and touch the heart of one
little girl you do what you think is
right I think it's right tomorrow to
stand up for what she believed in
why are you here with all these people
to be free and join the fight for
freedom made a big difference it's a
world television premiere with jurnee
smollett Yolanda Kane Clifton Powell
Mackenzie Astin and a special
introduction by Coretta Scott King selma
Lord Selma ABC Sunday at 7 6 central at
a time when we're inclined to minimize
or even forget the scale of passing
justices the voices we've heard tonight
have an importance far beyond their
number
professor Orlando Patterson of Harvard
has written that it is not surprising
that freedom and the love of it have
often been born in slave holding
societies in ancient Greece to cite one
example among the slaveholding founders
of our own country to cite another the
existence of slavery in such society
says professor Patterson elevates
freedom makes it more precious more
valuable not only to those who are not
free but to those who are this broadcast
I'd like to add was lovingly compiled
and largely created by our own senior
producer Karen DeWitt that's our report
for tonight I'm Ted Koppel in Washington
for all of us here at ABC News good
if you'd like a transcript or video
cassette of this or any other edition of
Nightline please dial
