Remember, No One Is Coming to Save Us
=====================================

_Eventually doctors will develop a coronavirus vaccine, but black
people will continue to wait for a cure for racism._

By Roxane Gay

30 May 2020

The New York Time / Opinion

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/30/opinion/sunday/trump-george-floyd-coronavirus.html

![Protesting the death of George Floyd in police custody in
Minneapolis on
Thursday.](https://static01.nyt.com/images/2020/05/31/opinion/sunday/29Gay/29Gay-articleLarge.jpg?quality=75&auto=webp&disable=upscale)

_Protesting the death of George Floyd in police custody in Minneapolis
on Thursday. Credit... Carlos Barria/Reuters_

After Donald Trump maligned the developing world in 2018, with the
dismissive phrase "shithole countries," I wrote that [no one was
coming to save
us](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/12/opinion/trump-shithole-countries-haiti-el-salvador-african-countries-immigration-racism.html)
from the president. Now, in the midst of a pandemic, we see exactly
what that means.

The economy is shattered. Unemployment continues to climb,
steeply. There is no coherent federal leadership. The president mocks
any attempts at modeling precautionary behaviors that might save
American lives. More than 100,000 Americans have died from Covid-19.

Many of us have been in some form of self-isolation for more than two
months. The less fortunate continue to risk their lives because they
cannot afford to shelter from the virus. People who were already
living on the margins are dealing with financial stresses that the
government's $1,200 "stimulus" payment cannot begin to relieve. A
housing crisis is imminent. Many parts of the country are reopening
prematurely. Protesters have stormed state capitals, demanding that
businesses reopen. The country is starkly dividing between those who
believe in science and those who don't.

Quickly produced commercials assure us that we are all in this
together. Carefully curated images, scored by treacly music, say
nothing of substance. Companies spend a fortune on airtime to assure
consumers that they care, while they refuse to pay their employees a
living wage.

Commercials celebrate essential workers and medical
professionals. Commercials show how corporations have adapted to "the
way we live now," with curbside pickup and drive-through service and
contact-free delivery. We can spend our way to normalcy, and
capitalism will hold us close, these ads would have us believe.

Some people are trying to provide the salvation the government will
not. There are community-led initiatives for everything from grocery
deliveries for the elderly and immunocompromised to sewing face masks
for essential workers. There are online pleas for fund-raising. Buy
from your independent bookstore. Get takeout or delivery from your
favorite restaurant. Keep your favorite bookstore open. Buy gift
cards. Pay the people who work for you, even if they can't come to
work. Do as much as you can, and then do more.

These are all lovely ideas and they demonstrate good intentions, but
we can only do so much. The disparities that normally fracture our
culture are becoming even more pronounced as we decide, collectively,
what we choose to save -- what deserves to be saved.

And even during a pandemic, racism is as pernicious as ever. Covid-19
is disproportionately affecting the black community, but we can hardly
take the time to sit with that horror as we are reminded, every single
day, that there is no context in which black lives matter.

Breonna Taylor was killed in her Louisville, Ky., home by police
officers looking for a man who did not even live in her building. She
was 26 years old. When demonstrations erupted, [seven people were
shot](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/29/us/louisville-protest-shooting-breonna-taylor.html).

Ahmaud Arbery was jogging in South Georgia when he was chased down by
two armed white men who suspected him of robbery and claimed they were
trying perform a citizen's arrest. One shot and killed Mr. Arbery
while a third person videotaped the encounter. No charges were filed
until the video was leaked and public outrage demanded
action. Mr. Arbery was 25 years old.

In Minneapolis, George Floyd was held to the ground by a police
officer kneeling on his neck during an arrest. He begged for the
officer to stop torturing him. Like Eric Garner, he said he couldn't
breathe. Three other police officers watched and did not
intervene. Mr. Floyd was 46 years old.

These black lives mattered. These black people were loved. Their
losses to their friends, family, and communities, are incalculable.

Demonstrators in Minneapolis took to the street for several days, to
protest the killing of Mr. Floyd. Mr. Trump -- who in 2017 told police
officers to be rough on people during arrests, imploring them to
"please, don't be too nice" -- [wrote in a tweet,
](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/29/us/politics/trump-looting-shooting.html)"When
the looting starts, the shooting starts." The official White House
Twitter feed reposted the president's comments. There is no rock
bottom.

Christian Cooper, an avid birder, was in Central Park's Ramble when he
asked a white woman, Amy Cooper, to comply with the law and leash her
dog. He began filming, which only enraged Ms. Cooper further. She
pulled out her phone and said she was going to call the police to tell
them an African-American man was threatening her.

She called the police. She knew what she was doing. She weaponized her
whiteness and fragility like so many white women before her. She began
to sound more and more hysterical, even though she had to have known
she was potentially sentencing a black man to death for expecting her
to follow rules she did not think applied to her. It is a stroke of
luck that Mr. Cooper did not become another unbearable statistic.

An unfortunate percentage of my cultural criticism over the past 11 or
12 years has focused on the senseless loss of black life. Mike
Brown. Trayvon Martin. Sandra Bland. Philando Castile. Tamir
Rice. Jordan Davis. Atatiana Jefferson. The Charleston Nine.

These names are the worst kind of refrain, an inescapable
burden. These names are hashtags, elegies, battle cries. Still nothing
changes. Racism is litigated over and over again when another video
depicting another atrocity comes to light. Black people share the
truth of their lives, and white people treat those truths as
intellectual exercises.

They put energy into being outraged about the name "Karen," as
shorthand for entitled white women rather than doing the difficult,
self-reflective work of examining their own prejudices. They speculate
about what murdered black people might have done that we don't know
about to beget their fates, as if alleged crimes are punishable by
death without a trial by jury. They demand perfection as the price for
black existence while harboring no such standards for anyone else.

Some white people act as if there are two sides to racism, as if
racists are people we need to reason with. They fret over the
destruction of property and want everyone to just get along. They
struggle to understand why black people are rioting but offer no
alternatives about what a people should do about a lifetime of rage,
disempowerment and injustice.

When I warned in 2018 that no one was coming to save us, I wrote that
I was tired of comfortable lies. I'm even more exhausted now. Like
many black people, I am furious and fed up, but that doesn't matter at
all.

I write similar things about different black lives lost over and over
and over. I tell myself I am done with this subject. Then something so
horrific happens that I know I must say something, even though I know
that the people who truly need to be moved are immovable. They don't
care about black lives. They don't care about anyone's lives. They
won't even wear masks to mitigate a virus for which there is no cure.

Eventually, doctors will find a
[coronavirus](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/02/us/politics/african-americans-china-coronavirus.html)
vaccine, but black people will continue to wait, despite the futility
of hope, for a cure for
[racism](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/02/us/politics/african-americans-china-coronavirus.html). We
will live with the knowledge that a hashtag is not a vaccine for white
supremacy. We live with the knowledge that, still, no one is coming to
save us. The rest of the world yearns to get back to normal. For black
people, normal is the very thing from which we yearn to be free.

Roxane Gay ([@rgay](https://twitter.com/rgay)) is a contributing
opinion writer.

~
