Minneapolis NAACP President On Why A City Ablaze Is 'A Long Time Coming'
========================================================================

https://www.npr.org/transcripts/866204366

By Michel Martin with Leslie Redmond of Minn. NAACP

NPR All Things Considered

30 May 2020

[Listen on NPR](https://ondemand.npr.org/anon.npr-mp3/npr/atc/2020/05/20200530_atc_minneapolis_naacp_president_on_why_a_city_ablaze_is_a_long_time_coming.mp3?orgId=1&topicId=1003&d=480&p=2&story=866204366&dl=1&siteplayer=true&size=7673634&dl=1)
8:00 minutes

MICHEL MARTIN, HOST:

Also yesterday in Minneapolis, a rally was held to demand justice and
accountability for **George Floyd**. Here's what **Leslie Redmond**,
president of the NAACP in Minneapolis, said at that rally.

(SOUNDBITE OF SPEECH)

LESLIE REDMOND: What you're witnessing in Minnesota is something
that's been a long time coming. I can't tell you how many governors
I've sat down with, how many mayors we've sat down with, and we've
warned them that if you keep murdering black people, this city will
burn. We have stopped this city from burning numerous times, and we
are not responsible for it burning now.

MARTIN: And Leslie Redmond is with us now from Minneapolis.

Ms. Redmond, thank you so much for joining us.

REDMOND: Thank you for having me.

MARTIN: We just heard you say that what's happening in Minnesota has
been a long time coming. Could you say a bit more about what you mean
by that?

REDMOND: Yes. So five years ago, we were in a similar situation that
didn't get this explosive. Jamar Clark was killed in North
Minneapolis, and we took over the 4th Precinct for 18-day
occupation. And that was the fall before Philando Castile was murdered
in St. Paul, right? We've seen several different murders since
then. And what a lot of people don't see is that black women a lot of
time are not being killed by the police, but we are being brutalized,
right? It's, like, at some point, the patience is going to run out.

MARTIN: I hope you don't mind if I point this out. You're very -
you're in your - you're only in your 20s.

REDMOND: (Laughter) Yes. I'm 28, to be exact.

MARTIN: You know, often when situations like this occur, some people
say they're shocked, and other people say they're not. Is this
something that you felt you've seen your whole life?

REDMOND: It's been a combination. When I've been on the ground and
seeing these things, I'm in disbelief. You know, it's like something
that you see on a TV screen. You - I never thought I would see it up
close and personal. But then, on the other side, I'm not shocked
because we've been warning them. Like, seriously, we've been putting
in the groundwork and fighting and working for years, and it's been
falling on deaf ears.

And so when I say yesterday at the press conference that black
Minnesota is done dying, and white Minnesota is done hiding - because
this has been a white Wakanda. I mean that. And a lot of people didn't
realize what I was saying because Minnesota has been a great place -
like, almost the best place in the United States for white people -
but at the expense of black bodies, right? And so it's now time for a
shift. And I think and I'm hopeful that we'll be able to figure out
that shift and move forward from here.

MARTIN: What I think I hear you saying is that while, you know, maybe
outside of the area, Minneapolis, Minn., more broadly, has this
reputation as this - you know, Minnesota nice - this place that is
kind of both thriving and congenial and inclusive. You're saying the
reality for a lot of the people of color is just very different, and
people are frustrated by the difference...

REDMOND: Yes.

MARTIN: ...Of seeing other people thrive while they continue to
suffer.

REDMOND: Well, Ms. Martin, let's dive into it, right? In modern
history, we hadn't seen a police conviction in the state of
Minnesota. The first officer to be convicted was Officer Noor, who was
a black Somali Muslim man who shot and killed Justine Damond in a dark
alley, right? That speaks volumes - that the first victim to get
justice was a white woman and the first police officer to be held
accountable was a black man. I just feel like that speaks volumes. And
we didn't even see the videotape from that.

And on one end, her family was awarded $20 million, where they were
able to give away $1 million to the Minneapolis Foundation when black
families haven't even gotten the $1 million that she was able to give
away, right? Like, this is the dynamic that we are dealing with. This
is the paradox of Minnesota.

MARTIN: And you mentioned Philando Castile, which is a name that I
think a lot of people certainly outside of Minneapolis will know. This
was an African American man who had a legal registered weapon and was
shot by - shot to death at close range in front of his girlfriend and
her child while reaching for his driver's license to comply with the
officer's demand.

REDMOND: Exactly. And actually, his mother, Ms. Valerie Castile - she
spoke at the rally yesterday, and her words brought almost everyone
into tears. And she said this similar thing to what we've been
saying. I've been trying to work with them. I've been trying to tell
them, you have to change this. You can't keep murdering black
bodies. And she said, this is the day of reckoning. This is an
uprising. So...

MARTIN: Derek Chauvin, the officer who pinned George Floyd to the
ground with his knee on Mr. Floyd's neck, was charged with
third-degree murder and manslaughter yesterday. And, you know,
unusually, as you noted, all four officers there were fired almost
immediately. From what you've seen, do those steps do anything to
reassure people that the justice system is working as it should to
address this?

REDMOND: Well, one of the things that got overlooked was **Chief
Arradondo**, who I have been mentioning every time I speak. He's the
first African American police chief that we've ever had in
Minneapolis. And that was a big deal because not only does he have
relationship with the community, he's from the community. And so that
morning - after everything happened on Tuesday morning, I'm referring
to - black leadership was meeting with him. And an hour later, he was
having a press conference, saying that these officers were being
fired.

And so he has been the most tremendous leader that I've seen out of
all of this, right? So I wanted to say first, that was a great
step. Mike Freeman making this arrest and charging this one officer is
one step.

But we need all four officers not just fired by Chief Arradondo but
charged because they were heavily involved in this murder. Two of them
actually had their knees on Mr. Floyd's back, and the other one was
holding off bystanders and not allowing them to interfere when one of
them could have potentially saved Mr. George Floyd's life. And so all
of them are in this.

MARTIN: Well, before we let you go - and obviously, this has a deep
stem, as you've been telling us - **Minnesota Governor Tim Walz** said
today that he is, quote-unquote, "fully mobilizing the state's
National Guard for the first time in the state's history." And he said
that it's nothing short of a blessing than an innocent bystander has
not yet been killed in the unrest. I mean, how do you respond to that?

REDMOND: Governor Walz has done nothing to protect the black
community, but he will put us at even greater risk. That is alarming
to me. Many of you witnessed a Black CNN reporter be arrested for
doing nothing - literally. He identified himself, and the officers
tell him that they were just following procedure. And that is going to
get a lot of innocent people arrested and potentially charged with god
knows what they're charging people with.

Now, these individuals that are being brought into Minnesota - to do
what, I don't know, but what I know they're not doing is protecting a
black community and keeping it from burning down. The community is the
one who are saving buildings from burning down. All I see the National
Guard and officers doing is tear gassing people that I've been on the
receiving end up.

It's super-counterproductive, and Governor Walz hasn't spent a dime on
de-escalating the situation, pouring into community organizations or
helping us to move forward in an effective way. And this is just going
to add fuel to the fire and build bad relationships with the
community.

MARTIN: Leslie Redmond is the president of the Minneapolis chapter of
the NAACP.

Ms. Redmond, thank you so much for speaking with us. I hope we'll
speak again.

REDMOND: Yes. Thank you so much, Ms. Martin, for all you do.

(SOUNDBITE OF ELAQUENT'S "MY APOLOGIES")

MARTIN: Later this hour, we'll get two perspectives on why incidents
like the one in Minneapolis continue to happen despite the fact that
we've known about excessive use of force for some time.

UNIDENTIFIED PERSON: Chiefs don't really have the mechanisms to hold
officers accountable for repeat violations of abuse.

MARTIN: That's coming up later in the program.

(SOUNDBITE OF ELAQUENT'S "MY APOLOGIES")

Copyright (C) 2020 NPR.

NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by [Verb8tm,
Inc.](http://www.verb8tm.com/), an NPR contractor, and produced using
a proprietary transcription process developed with NPR. This text may
not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the
future. Accuracy and availability may vary. The authoritative record
of NPR's programming is the audio record.

~
