Who Do You Serve, Who Do You Protect?
=====================================

_Police Violence and Resistance in the United States_

Edited by Joe Macaré, Maya Schenwar, and Alana Yu-lan Price

Foreword by Alicia Garza

PAPERBACK, 224 PAGES
ISBN: 9781608466122
June 2016
$18.00
EBOOK, 250 PAGES
ISBN: 9781608466849

FREE 100% off

Explores the reality of US police violence against Black, Brown and
Indigenous communities.

What is the reality of policing in the United States? Do the police
keep anyone safe and secure other than the very wealthy? How do recent
police killings of young black people in the United States fit into
the historical and global context of anti-blackness?

This collection of reports and essays (the first collaboration between
Truthout and Haymarket Books) explores police violence against black,
brown, indigenous and other marginalized communities, miscarriages of
justice, and failures of token accountability and reform measures. It
also makes a compelling and provocative argument against calling the
police.

Contributions cover a broad range of issues including the killing by
police of black men and women, police violence against Latino and
indigenous communities, law enforcement's treatment of pregnant people
and those with mental illness, and the impact of racist police
violence on parenting, as well as specific stories such as a Detroit
police conspiracy to slap murder convictions on young black men using
police informant and the failure of Chicago's much-touted Independent
Police Review Authority, the body supposedly responsible for
investigating police misconduct. The title Who Do You Serve, Who Do
You Protect? is no mere provocation: the book also explores
alternatives for keeping communities safe.

Contributors include William C. Anderson, Candice Bernd, Aaron Cantú,
Thandi Chimurenga, Ejeris Dixon, Adam Hudson, Victoria Law, Mike
Ludwig, Sarah Macaraeg, and Roberto Rodriguez.

For further reading, check out Haymarket Books Against Policing & Mass
Incarceration

Reviews
-------

"Would some communities be safer without police? That’s the question
at the heart of Who Do You Serve, Who Do You Protect?, a collection of
essays and reportage penned by some of Truthout’s most compelling and
enlightened thinkers—including #BlackLivesMatter co-founder Alicia
Garza. With heartbreaking, glass-sharp prose, the book catalogs the
abuse and destruction of black, native, and trans bodies. And then,
most importantly, it offers real-world solutions."
—Chicago Review of Books

"A must-read for anyone seeking to understand American culture in the
present day."
—Xica Nation

"Who Do You Serve, Who Do You Protect? is an urgently necessary book,
one that deepens and complicates thinking around police violence
without waiting for a fresh on-camera brutality to restart the
national conversation."
—New City

"This brilliant collection of essays, written by activists,
journalists, community organizers and survivors of state violence,
urgently confronts the criminalization, police violence and anti-Black
racism that is plaguing urban communities. It is one of the most
important books to emerge about these critical issues: passionately
written with a keen eye towards building a world free of the cruelty
and violence of the carceral state."
–Beth Richie, author of Arrested Justice: Black Women, Violence, and
America’s Prison Nation

"Who Do You Serve, Who Do You Protect? is a powerful collection of
essays by organizers, legal activists and progressive journalists that
take us beyond the 'few bad apples' theory of police violence,
insisting that we interrogate the essential role and purpose of police
and policing in our society. These writers have highlighted some of
the critical questions that the anti-state violence movement is
wrestling with."
–Barbara Ransby, author of Ella Baker and the Black Freedom Movement:
A Radical Democratic Vision

"This timely and essential set of essays written by activists,
organizers and journalists offers a window into our particular
historical moment centered on an ongoing struggle against state
violence. As a long-time organizer immersed in the current Movement
for Black Lives, I read the contributions hoping to learn and to be
inspired. I found the essays to be informative, illuminating and
challenging. The book covers topics ranging from police torture and
the fight for accountability to how we might best engage in
transformative organizing that could lead to a word without police. I
cannot recommend this anthology any more highly. It's an indispensable
primer for anyone who wants to understand the current rebellions and
uprisings against police impunity."
–Mariame Kaba, founder and director of Project NIA

"Who Do You Serve, Who Do You Protect? is an extraordinary collection
of writings by activists living and working at the epicenter of police
violence and the anti-Blackness and structural racism so foundational
to U.S. systems of policing. Simultaneously enraging, invigorating,
radically imaginative, practical, and inspiring, this essential book
relocates justice in accountable social, economic, and cultural
relationships, pointing the way toward foundational transformation
rather than cosmetic reform."
–Kay Whitlock, co-author of Considering Hate and Queer (In)Justice

"America is at war, and the violence that propels that war is largely
directed at people of color, especially Black youth. One instance of
such a war is evident in the violence by the police against Black
communities, the criminalization of everyday behavior, the assaults on
Black bodies, and the ever growing incarceration state. Who Do You
Serve, Who Do You Protect? addresses this violence in a way no other
book has done in the last forty years. It reveals the underlying
causes, economic and ideological, that drive such violence so as to
provide a comprehensive understanding of its roots, its multiple
layers, history, and different forms while at the same time it offers
a discourse of critical engagement and transformation in order to
address it. Who Do You Serve, Who Do You Protect? is an invaluable
resource for asking questions about the emergence of racist violence
and state terrorism as a defining principle of everyday life and how
they can be addressed. Everyone who cares about justice and democracy
and a future in which they mutually inform each other should read this
book."
–Henry Giroux, author of Disposable Futures: The Seduction of Violence
in the Age of Spectacle

"We know the names: Trayvon Martin, Michael Brown, Freddie Gray, Eric
Garner, Sandra Bland, Tamir Rice, Rekia Boyd, Laquan McDonald. And
we’ve seen the uprisings: L.A., Ferguson, Baltimore, Chicago. Who Do
You Serve, Who Do You Protect? goes behind the headlines to ask the
deeper questions: Do the police make communities (particularly,
communities where Black and Brown people live) safer? Who do community
residents fear? Are there ways to address those fears without the
police and carceral state? What would we have to create in order to do
this? What steps must we take to get there? Each of the essays
examines these inter-related questions in depth. Read together, they
provide an extremely thorough, and timely, examination of the issues
underlying these recent events, forcing us to rethink the very idea of
justice in this country."
–Alan Mills, Uptown People's Law Center

"Would some communities be safer without police? That’s the question
at the heart of Who Do You Serve, Who Do You Protect?, a collection of
essays and reportage penned by some of Truthout’s most compelling and
enlightened thinkers—including #BlackLivesMatter co-founder Alicia
Garza. With heartbreaking, glass-sharp prose, the book catalogs the
abuse and destruction of black, native, and trans bodies. And then,
most importantly, it offers real-world solutions."
—Chicago Review of Books


"A must-read for anyone seeking to understand American culture in the
present day."
—Xica Nation

"Who Do You Serve, Who Do You Protect? is an urgently necessary book,
one that deepens and complicates thinking around police violence
without waiting for a fresh on-camera brutality to restart the
national conversation."
—New City

"This brilliant collection of essays, written by activists,
journalists, community organizers and survivors of state violence,
urgently confronts the criminalization, police violence and anti-Black
racism that is plaguing urban communities. It is one of the most
important books to emerge about these critical issues: passionately
written with a keen eye towards building a world free of the cruelty
and violence of the carceral state."
—Beth Richie, author of Arrested Justice: Black Women, Violence,
and America’s Prison Nation

"Who Do You Serve, Who Do You Protect? is a powerful collection of
essays by organizers, legal activists and progressive journalists that
take us beyond the 'few bad apples' theory of police violence,
insisting that we interrogate the essential role and purpose of police
and policing in our society. These writers have highlighted some of
the critical questions that the anti-state violence movement is
wrestling with."
—Barbara Ransby, author of Ella Baker and the Black Freedom
Movement: A Radical Democratic Vision

"This timely and essential set of essays written by activists,
organizers and journalists offers a window into our particular
historical moment centered on an ongoing struggle against state
violence. As a long-time organizer immersed in the current Movement
for Black Lives, I read the contributions hoping to learn and to be
inspired. I found the essays to be informative, illuminating and
challenging. The book covers topics ranging from police torture and
the fight for accountability to how we might best engage in
transformative organizing that could lead to a word without police. I
cannot recommend this anthology any more highly. It's an indispensable
primer for anyone who wants to understand the current rebellions and
uprisings against police impunity."
—Mariame Kaba, founder and director of Project NIA

"Who Do You Serve, Who Do You Protect? is an extraordinary collection
of writings by activists living and working at the epicenter of police
violence and the anti-Blackness and structural racism so foundational
to U.S. systems of policing. Simultaneously enraging, invigorating,
radically imaginative, practical, and inspiring, this essential book
relocates justice in accountable social, economic, and cultural
relationships, pointing the way toward foundational transformation
rather than cosmetic reform."
—Kay Whitlock, co-author of Considering Hate and Queer (In)Justice

"America is at war, and the violence that propels that war is largely
directed at people of color, especially Black youth. One instance of
such a war is evident in the violence by the police against Black
communities, the criminalization of everyday behavior, the assaults on
Black bodies, and the ever growing incarceration state. Who Do You
Serve, Who Do You Protect? addresses this violence in a way no other
book has done in the last forty years. It reveals the underlying
causes, economic and ideological, that drive such violence so as to
provide a comprehensive understanding of its roots, its multiple
layers, history, and different forms while at the same time it offers
a discourse of critical engagement and transformation in order to
address it. Who Do You Serve, Who Do You Protect? is an invaluable
resource for asking questions about the emergence of racist violence
and state terrorism as a defining principle of everyday life and how
they can be addressed. Everyone who cares about justice and democracy
and a future in which they mutually inform each other should read this
book."
—Henry Giroux, author of Disposable Futures: The Seduction of
Violence in the Age of Spectacle

"We know the names: Trayvon Martin, Michael Brown, Freddie Gray, Eric
Garner, Sandra Bland, Tamir Rice, Rekia Boyd, Laquan McDonald. And
we’ve seen the uprisings: L.A., Ferguson, Baltimore, Chicago. Who Do
You Serve, Who Do You Protect? goes behind the headlines to ask the
deeper questions: Do the police make communities (particularly,
communities where Black and Brown people live) safer? Who do community
residents fear? Are there ways to address those fears without the
police and carceral state? What would we have to create in order to do
this? What steps must we take to get there? Each of the essays
examines these inter-related questions in depth. Read together, they
provide an extremely thorough, and timely, examination of the issues
underlying these recent events, forcing us to rethink the very idea of
justice in this country."
—Alan Mills, Uptown People's Law Center
